CHEMISTRY 101A
GENERAL COLLEGE
CHEMISTRY
Torrey Glenn
City College of San Francisco

City College of San Francisco
Chemistry 101A General College Chemistry
Torrey Glenn

Throughout human history, people have tried to convert matter into more useful forms. Our Stone Age ancestors chipped pieces of
flint into useful tools and carved wood into statues and toys. These endeavors involved changing the shape of a substance without
changing the substance itself. But as our knowledge i ncreased, humans began to change the composition of the substances as well
—clay was converted into pottery, hides were cured to m ake garments, copper ores were transformed into copper tools and
weapons, and grain was made into bread.
Humans began to practice chemistry when they learned t o control fire and use it to cook, make pottery, and smelt metals.
Subsequently, they began to separate and use specific c omponents of matter. A variety of drugs such as aloe, m yrrh, and opium
were isolated from plants. Dyes, such as indigo and Tyri an purple, were extracted from plant and animal matte r. Metals were
combined to form alloys—for example, copper and tin were mixed together to make bronze—and more elabora te smelting
techniques produced iron. Alkalis were extracted from as hes, and soaps were prepared by combining these alkalis with fats.
Alcohol was produced by fermentation and purified by dis tillation.
Attempts to understand the behavior of matter extend back for more than 2500 years. As early as the sixth c entury BC, Greek
philosophers discussed a system in which water was the bas is of all things. You may have heard of the Greek post ulate that matter
consists of four elements: earth, air, fire, and wate r. Subsequently, an amalgamation of chemical technolog ies and philosophical
speculations were spread from Egypt, China, and the ea stern Mediterranean by alchemists, who endeavored to transform “base
metals” such as lead into “noble metals” like gold, and to create elixirs to cure disease and extend life (Figure).
Figure: This portrayal shows an alchemist’s workshop circ a 1580. Although alchemy made some useful contributio ns to how
to manipulate matter, it was not scientific by modern standards. (credit: Chemical Heritage Foundation).
From alchemy came the historical progressions that le d to modern chemistry: the isolation of drugs from natural sources,
metallurgy, and the dye industry. Today, chemistry con tinues to deepen our understanding and improve our ability to harness and
control the behavior of matter. This effort has been so successful that many people do not realize either the central position of
chemistry among the sciences or the importance and univ ersality of chemistry in daily life.Learning Objectives

Chemistry is sometimes referred to as “the central sci ence” due to its interconnectedness with a vast array of other STEM
disciplines (STEM stands for areas of study in the scie nce, technology, engineering, and math fields). Chemi stry and the language
of chemists play vital roles in biology, medicine, m aterials science, forensics, environmental science, and many other fields (Figure
). The basic principles of physics are essential for understanding many aspects of chemistry, and there i s extensive overlap
between many subdisciplines within the two fields, such a s chemical physics and nuclear chemistry. Mathematics, computer
science, and information theory provide important to ols that help us calculate, interpret, describe, and ge nerally make sense of the
chemical world. Biology and chemistry converge in bi ochemistry, which is crucial to understanding the many complex factors and
processes that keep living organisms (such as us) alive. Chemical engineering, materials science, and nanote chnology combine
chemical principles and empirical findings to produc e useful substances, ranging from gasoline to fabrics to electronics.
Agriculture, food science, veterinary science, and brewin g and wine making help provide sustenance in the form of food and drink
to the world’s population. Medicine, pharmacology, biot echnology, and botany identify and produce substanc es that help keep us
healthy. Environmental science, geology, oceanography, and atmospheric science incorporate many chemical ideas to help us better
understand and protect our physical world. Chemical ide as are used to help understand the universe in astronomy an d cosmology.
Figure: Knowledge of chemistry is central to understan ding a wide range of scientific disciplines. This diagr am shows just
some of the interrelationships between chemistry and ot her fields.
What are some changes in matter that are essential to daily life? Digesting and assimilating food, synthe sizing polymers that are
used to make clothing, containers, cookware, and credi t cards, and refining crude oil into gasoline and ot her products are just a few
examples. As you proceed through this course, you will di scover many different examples of changes in the comp osition and
structure of matter, how to classify these changes an d how they occurred, their causes, the changes in en ergy that accompany them,
and the principles and laws involved. As you learn abou t these things, you will be learning chemistry, the st udy of the composition,
properties, and interactions of matter. The practice of chemistry is not limited to chemistry books or lab oratories: It happens
whenever someone is involved in changes in matter or in c onditions that may lead to such changes.
The Scientific Method
Chemistry is a science based on observation and exp erimentation. Doing chemistry involves attempting to answer questions and
explain observations in terms of the laws and theories of chemistry, using procedures that are accepted by the scientific community.
There is no single route to answering a question or expl aining an observation, but there is an aspect common to every approach:
Each uses knowledge based on experiments that can be reproduced to verify the results. Some routes involve a hypothesis, a
tentative explanation of observations that acts as a guide for gathering and checking information. We t est a hypothesis by
experimentation, calculation, and/or comparison with the e xperiments of others and then refine it as needed.
Some hypotheses are attempts to explain the behavior t hat is summarized in laws. The laws of science summarize a vast number of
experimental observations, and describe or predict some facet of the natural world. If such a hypothesis turns out to be capable of
explaining a large body of experimental data, it ca n reach the status of a theory. Scientific theories a re well-substantiated,
comprehensive, testable explanations of particular aspects of nature. Theories are accepted because they provide satisfactory

9.2.1.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/203446explanations, but they can be modified if new data b ecome available. The path of discovery that leads fro m question and
observation to law or hypothesis to theory, combined wi th experimental verification of the hypothesis and an y necessary
modification of the theory, is called the scientific meth od (Figure).
Figure: The scientific method follows a process similar to the one shown in this diagram. All the key compone nts are shown,
in roughly the right order. Scientific progress is seld om neat and clean: It requires open inquiry and the reworking of questions and
ideas in response to findings.
The Domains of Chemistry
Chemists study and describe the behavior of matter and energy in three different domains: macroscopic, m icroscopic, and
symbolic. These domains provide different ways of considerin g and describing chemical behavior.
Macro is a Greek word that means “large.” The macroscopic dom ain is familiar to us: It is the realm of everyday thi ngs that are
large enough to be sensed directly by human sight or touch. In daily life, this includes the food you eat and the breeze you feel on
your face. The macroscopic domain includes everyday and laboratory chemistry, where we observe and measur e physical and
chemical properties, or changes such as density, solubility, a nd flammability.
The microscopic domain of chemistry is almost always v isited in the imagination. Micro also comes from Greek and means
“small.” Some aspects of the microscopic domains are v isible through a microscope, such as a magnified imag e of graphite or
bacteria. Viruses, for instance, are too small to be se en with the naked eye, but when we’re suffering from a c old, we’re reminded
of how real they are.
However, most of the subjects in the microscopic domain of chemistry—such as atoms and molecules—are too smal l to be seen
even with standard microscopes and often must be pict ured in the mind. Other components of the microscopi c domain include ions
and electrons, protons and neutrons, and chemical bond s, each of which is far too small to see. This domain includes the individual
metal atoms in a wire, the ions that compose a salt cr ystal, the changes in individual molecules that resu lt in a color change, the
conversion of nutrient molecules into tissue and energy, an d the evolution of heat as bonds that hold atoms togethe r are created.
The symbolic domain contains the specialized languag e used to represent components of the macroscopic and microscopic
domains. Chemical symbols (such as those used in the periodic table), chemical formulas, and chemical eq uations are part of the
symbolic domain, as are graphs and drawings. We can als o consider calculations as part of the symbolic doma in. These symbols
play an important role in chemistry because they hel p interpret the behavior of the macroscopic domain in terms of the components
of the microscopic domain. One of the challenges for students learning chemistry is recognizing that the same symbols can
represent different things in the macroscopic and mi croscopic domains, and one of the features that make s chemistry fascinating is
the use of a domain that must be imagined to explain beha vior in a domain that can be observed.
A helpful way to understand the three domains is via t he essential and ubiquitous substance of water. That water is a liquid at
moderate temperatures, will freeze to form a solid at lower temperatures, and boil to form a gas at higher t emperatures (Figure
1.1.4) are macroscopic observations. But some properties of water fall into the microscopic domain—what we cann ot observe with

9.2.1.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/203446the naked eye. The description of water as comprised of two hydrogen atoms and one oxygen atom, and the e xplanation of freezing
and boiling in terms of attractions between these mol ecules, is within the microscopic arena. The formula H O, which can describe
water at either the macroscopic or microscopic level s, is an example of the symbolic domain. The abbrev iations (g) for gas, (s) for
solid, and (l) for liquid are also symbolic.
Figure: (a) Moisture in the air, icebergs, and the oc ean represent water in the macroscopic domain. (b) At the molecular level
(microscopic domain), gas molecules are far apart and disorganized, solid water molecules are close together and organized, and
liquid molecules are close together and disorganized. (c) The formula H O symbolizes water, and (g), (s), and (l) symbolize its
phases. Note that clouds are actually comprised of eith er very small liquid water droplets or solid water cry stals; gaseous water in
our atmosphere is not visible to the naked eye, althou gh it may be sensed as humidity. (credit a: modificati on of work by
“Gorkaazk”/Wikimedia Commons).
Key Concepts and Summary
Chemistry deals with the composition, structure, and p roperties of matter, and the ways by which various fo rms of matter may be
interconverted. Thus, it occupies a central place in the study and practice of science and technology. C hemists use the scientific
method to perform experiments, pose hypotheses, and form ulate laws and develop theories, so that they can better understand the
behavior of the natural world. To do so, they operate in the macroscopic, microscopic, and symbolic domains. C hemists measure,
analyze, purify, and synthesize a wide variety of substanc es that are important to our lives.
Glossary
chemistry
study of the composition, properties, and interactions of matter
hypothesis
tentative explanation of observations that acts as a gu ide for gathering and checking information
law
statement that summarizes a vast number of experimental observations, and describes or predicts some aspect of the natural
world
macroscopic domain
realm of everyday things that are large enough to sense di rectly by human sight and touch
microscopic domain
realm of things that are much too small to be sensed di rectly
scientific method
path of discovery that leads from question and observation to law or hypothesis to theory, combined with experimental
verification of the hypothesis and any necessary modifi cation of the theory
symbolic domain2

9.2.1.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/203446specialized language used to represent components of th e macroscopic and microscopic domains, such as chemic al symbols,
chemical formulas, chemical equations, graphs, drawings, a nd calculations
theory
well-substantiated, comprehensive, testable explanation of a particular aspect of nature
Contributors and Attributions
Paul Flowers (University of North Carolina - Pembroke), Kla us Theopold (University of Delaware) and Richard Langl ey
(Stephen F. Austin State University) with contributing au thors. Textbook content produced by OpenStax College i s licensed
under a Creative Commons Attribution License 4.0 license. Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/85abf1932bd...a7ac8df6@9.110).
This page titled 9.2.1: Chemistry in Context is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax.

9.2.2.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2034479.2.2: Phases and Classification of Matter
Describe the basic properties of each physical state of m atter: solid, liquid, and gas
Define and give examples of atoms and molecules
Classify matter as an element, compound, homogeneous mixtu re, or heterogeneous mixture with regard to its physi cal state
and composition
Distinguish between mass and weight
Apply the law of conservation of matter
Matter is defined as anything that occupies space and has mass, and it is all around us. Solids and liquids a re more obviously
matter: We can see that they take up space, and their weight tells us that they have mass. Gases are also matte r; if gases did not take
up space, a balloon would stay collapsed rather than infl ate when filled with gas.
Solids, liquids, and gases are the three states of matt er commonly found on earth (Figure). A solid is rigi d and possesses a
definite shape. A liquid flows and takes the shape of a container, except that it forms a flat or slightly c urved upper surface when
acted upon by gravity. (In zero gravity, liquids assume a spherical shape.) Both liquid and solid samples h ave volumes that are very
nearly independent of pressure. A gas takes both the shape an d volume of its container.
Figure: The three most common states or phases of matter are solid, liquid, and gas.
A fourth state of matter, plasma, occurs naturally in the interiors of stars. A plasma is a gaseous state o f matter that contains
appreciable numbers of electrically charged particle s (Figure). The presence of these charged particles i mparts unique
properties to plasmas that justify their classificat ion as a state of matter distinct from gases. In ad dition to stars, plasmas are found
in some other high-temperature environments (both n atural and man-made), such as lightning strikes, cer tain television screens,
and specialized analytical instruments used to detect tr ace amounts of metals.
Figure: A plasma torch can be used to cut metal. (cre dit: “Hypertherm”/Wikimedia Commons)Learning Objectives

9.2.2.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/203447Video: In a tiny cell in a plasma television, the plasma emits ultravi olet light, which in turn causes the display at that
location to appear a specific color. The composite of these tiny dots of color makes up the image that you see. Watch this video to
learn more about plasma and the places you encounter it.
Some samples of matter appear to have properties of so lids, liquids, and/or gases at the same time. This can occur when the sample
is composed of many small pieces. For example, we can p our sand as if it were a liquid because it is compos ed of many small
grains of solid sand. Matter can also have properties of more than one state when it is a mixture, such as with clouds. Clouds appear
to behave somewhat like gases, but they are actually mixtu res of air (gas) and tiny particles of water (liquid or soli d).
The mass of an object is a measure of the amount of m atter in it. One way to measure an object’s mass is to measure the force it
takes to accelerate the object. It takes much more fo rce to accelerate a car than a bicycle because the c ar has much more mass. A
more common way to determine the mass of an object is to us e a balance to compare its mass with a standard mass.
Although weight is related to mass, it is not the same thing. Weight refers to the force that gravity exer ts on an object. This force is
directly proportional to the mass of the object. The weight of an object changes as the force of gravity changes, but its mass does
not. An astronaut’s mass does not change just because sh e goes to the moon. But her weight on the moon is only one-sixth her
earth-bound weight because the moon’s gravity is onl y one-sixth that of the earth’s. She may feel “weightl ess” during her trip when
she experiences negligible external forces (gravitationa l or any other), although she is, of course, never “mass less.”
The law of conservation of matter summarizes many scien tific observations about matter: It states that there is no detectable
change in the total quantity of matter present when matter converts from one type to another (a chemical cha nge) or changes
among solid, liquid, or gaseous states (a physical chan ge). Brewing beer and the operation of batteries provide examples of the
conservation of matter (Figure). During the brewing o f beer, the ingredients (water, yeast, grains, malt, hops, and sugar) are
converted into beer (water, alcohol, carbonation, and f lavoring substances) with no actual loss of substance. This is most clearly
seen during the bottling process, when glucose turns i nto ethanol and carbon dioxide, and the total mass o f the substances does not
change. This can also be seen in a lead-acid car batt ery: The original substances (lead, lead oxide, and s ulfuric acid), which are
capable of producing electricity, are changed into o ther substances (lead sulfate and water) that do not p roduce electricity, with no
change in the actual amount of matter.
What is Plasma?What is Plasma?

9.2.2.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/203447
Figure: (a) The mass of beer precursor materials is the same as the mass of beer produced: Sugar has become alco hol and
carbonation. (b) The mass of the lead, lead oxide plates, and sulfuric acid that goes into the production of electricity i s exactly equal
to the mass of lead sulfate and water that is formed.
Although this conservation law holds true for all conv ersions of matter, convincing examples are few and far between because,
outside of the controlled conditions in a laboratory, we seldom collect all of the material that is produc ed during a particular
conversion. For example, when you eat, digest, and assimi late food, all of the matter in the original food is preserved. But because
some of the matter is incorporated into your body, a nd much is excreted as various types of waste, it is challenging to verify by
measurement.
Atoms and Molecules
An atom is the smallest particle of an element that h as the properties of that element and can enter into a chemical combination.
Consider the element gold, for example. Imagine cutti ng a gold nugget in half, then cutting one of the ha lves in half, and repeating
this process until a piece of gold remained that was so small that it could not be cut in half (regardless of how tiny your knife may
be). This minimally sized piece of gold is an atom (from the Greek atomos, meaning “indivisible”) (Figure 1.2.4). This atom woul d
no longer be gold if it were divided any further.
Figure: (a) This photograph shows a gold nugget. (b) A scanning-tunneling microscope (STM) can generate vie ws of the
surfaces of solids, such as this image of a gold crystal. E ach sphere represents one gold atom. (credit a: modifi cation of work by
United States Geological Survey; credit b: modificat ion of work by “Erwinrossen”/Wikimedia Commons)
The first suggestion that matter is composed of atoms is attributed to the Greek philosophers Leucippus an d Democritus, who
developed their ideas in the 5th century BCE. However, it was not until the early nineteenth century that John Dalton (1766–1844),
a British schoolteacher with a keen interest in scien ce, supported this hypothesis with quantitative measure ments. Since that time,
repeated experiments have confirmed many aspects of this hypothesis, and it has become one of the centr al theories of chemistry.
Other aspects of Dalton’s atomic theory are still used b ut with minor revisions (details of Dalton’s theory a re provided in the
chapter on atoms and molecules).
An atom is so small that its size is difficult to imagi ne. One of the smallest things we can see with our una ided eye is a single thread
of a spider web: These strands are about 1/10,000 of a centimeter (0.0001 cm) in diameter. Although the cr oss-section of one strand
is almost impossible to see without a microscope, it is huge on an atomic scale. A single carbon atom in the web has a diameter of
about 0.000000015 centimeter, and it would take abou t 7000 carbon atoms to span the diameter of the str and. To put this in
perspective, if a carbon atom were the size of a dim e, the cross-section of one strand would be larger than a football field, which

9.2.2.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/203447would require about 150 million carbon atom “dimes” to cover it. (Figure) shows increasingly close micros copic and
atomic-level views of ordinary cotton.
Figure: These images provide an increasingly closer vie w: (a) a cotton boll, (b) a single cotton fiber view ed under an optical
microscope (magnified 40 times), (c) an image of a co tton fiber obtained with an electron microscope (muc h higher magnification
than with the optical microscope); and (d and e) ato mic-level models of the fiber (spheres of different co lors represent atoms of
different elements). (credit c: modification of work by “Featheredtar”/Wikimedia Commons)
An atom is so light that its mass is also difficult to imagine. A billion lead atoms (1,000,000,000 atoms) wei gh about
grams, a mass that is far too light to be weighed on ev en the world’s most sensitive balances. It would requ ire over
300,000,000,000,000 lead atoms (300 trillion, or 3 × 10) t o be weighed, and they would weigh only 0.0000001 gram.
It is rare to find collections of individual atoms. Only a few elements, such as the gases helium, neon, and argon, consist of a
collection of individual atoms that move about indep endently of one another. Other elements, such as the gases hydrogen, nitrogen,
oxygen, and chlorine, are composed of units that con sist of pairs of atoms (Figure). One form of the eleme nt phosphorus
consists of units composed of four phosphorus atoms. T he element sulfur exists in various forms, one of whi ch consists of units
composed of eight sulfur atoms. These units are called molecules. A molecule consists of two or more atoms j oined by strong
forces called chemical bonds. The atoms in a molecul e move around as a unit, much like the cans of soda in a six-pack or a bunch
of keys joined together on a single key ring. A molec ule may consist of two or more identical atoms, as in the molecules found in
the elements hydrogen, oxygen, and sulfur, or it may consist of two or more different atoms, as in the m olecules found in water.
Each water molecule is a unit that contains two hydro gen atoms and one oxygen atom. Each glucose molecule is a unit that
contains 6 carbon atoms, 12 hydrogen atoms, and 6 ox ygen atoms. Like atoms, molecules are incredibly smal l and light. If an
ordinary glass of water were enlarged to the size of the earth, the water molecules inside it would be about the si ze of golf balls.
Figure: The elements hydrogen, oxygen, phosphorus, and sulfur form molecules consisting of two or more atoms o f the
same element. The compounds water, carbon dioxide, an d glucose consist of combinations of atoms of different elements.
Classifying Matter
We can classify matter into several categories. Two b road categories are mixtures and pure substances. A pu re substance has a
constant composition. All specimens of a pure substa nce have exactly the same makeup and properties. Any sample of sucrose
(table sugar) consists of 42.1% carbon, 6.5% hydrogen, and 51.4% oxygen by mass. Any sample of sucrose also has the same
physical properties, such as melting point, color, and sweet ness, regardless of the source from which it is isolated.
We can divide pure substances into two classes: element s and compounds. Pure substances that cannot be broken d own into simpler
substances by chemical changes are called elements. Ir on, silver, gold, aluminum, sulfur, oxygen, and copper are familiar examples
of the more than 100 known elements, of which about 90 occur naturally on the earth, and two dozen or so ha ve been created in
laboratories.
Pure substances that can be broken down by chemical ch anges are called compounds. This breakdown may produce either elements
or other compounds, or both. Mercury(II) oxide, an or ange, crystalline solid, can be broken down by heat into the elements
mercury and oxygen (Figure). When heated in the abs ence of air, the compound sucrose is broken down into the element
carbon and the compound water. (The initial stage of this process, when the sugar is turning brown, is known as caramelization—14

9.2.2.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/203447this is what imparts the characteristic sweet and nutty f lavor to caramel apples, caramelized onions, and caram el). Silver(I) chloride
is a white solid that can be broken down into its ele ments, silver and chlorine, by absorption of light. T his property is the basis for
the use of this compound in photographic films and p hotochromic eyeglasses (those with lenses that darken wh en exposed to light).
Figure: (a)The compound mercury(II) oxide, (b)when heated, (c) decomposes into silvery droplets of liquid mercury and
invisible oxygen gas. (credit: modification of work b y Paul Flowers)
The properties of combined elements are different fr om those in the free, or uncombined, state. For exampl e, white crystalline
sugar (sucrose) is a compound resulting from the ch emical combination of the element carbon, which is a black solid in one of its
uncombined forms, and the two elements hydrogen and oxy gen, which are colorless gases when uncombined. Free sodi um, an
element that is a soft, shiny, metallic solid, and fre e chlorine, an element that is a yellow-green gas, com bine to form sodium
chloride (table salt), a compound that is a white, crystallin e solid.
A mixture is composed of two or more types of matter that can be present in varying amounts and can be separated by physical
changes, such as evaporation (you will learn more abo ut this later). A mixture with a composition that va ries from point to point is
called a heterogeneous mixture. Italian dressing is an example of a heterogeneous mixture (Figure). Its c omposition can
vary because we can make it from varying amounts of o il, vinegar, and herbs. It is not the same from point to point throughout the
mixture—one drop may be mostly vinegar, whereas a dif ferent drop may be mostly oil or herbs because the oi l and vinegar
separate and the herbs settle. Other examples of heter ogeneous mixtures are chocolate chip cookies (we can see the separate bits of
chocolate, nuts, and cookie dough) and granite (we can see t he quartz, mica, feldspar, and more).
A homogeneous mixture, also called a solution, exhi bits a uniform composition and appears visually the same throughout. An
example of a solution is a sports drink, consisting of water, sugar, coloring, flavoring, and electrolytes m ixed together uniformly
(Figure). Each drop of a sports drink tastes the same because each drop contains the same amounts of water, sugar, and
other components. Note that the composition of a sports drink can vary—it could be made with somewhat more o r less sugar,
flavoring, or other components, and still be a sport s drink. Other examples of homogeneous mixtures includ e air, maple syrup,
gasoline, and a solution of salt in water.
Figure: (a) Oil and vinegar salad dressing is a heterog eneous mixture because its composition is not uniform th roughout. (b)
A commercial sports drink is a homogeneous mixture beca use its composition is uniform throughout. (credit a “l eft”: modification
of work by John Mayer; credit a “right”: modificatio n of work by Umberto Salvagnin; credit b “left: modi fication of work by Jeff
Bedford)
Although there are just over 100 elements, tens of m illions of chemical compounds result from different combinations of these
elements. Each compound has a specific composition an d possesses definite chemical and physical properties b y which we can
distinguish it from all other compounds. And, of cou rse, there are innumerable ways to combine elements a nd compounds to form
different mixtures. A summary of how to distinguish bet ween the various major classifications of matter is shown i n (Figure 1.2.8).

9.2.2.6 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/203447
Figure: Depending on its properties, a given substance can be classified as a homogeneous mixture, a heterogen eous
mixture, a compound, or an element.
Eleven elements make up about 99% of the earth’s cru st and atmosphere (Table). Oxygen constitutes nearly one-half and
silicon about one-quarter of the total quantity of these elements. A majority of elements on earth are found in chemical
combinations with other elements; about one-quarter o f the elements are also found in the free state.
Table: Elemental Composition of Earth
Element Symbol Percent Mass Element Symbol Percent Mass
oxygen O 49.20
chlorine Cl 0.19
silicon Si 25.67 phosphorus P 0.11
aluminum Al 7.50 manganese Mn 0.09
iron Fe 4.71 carbon C 0.08
calcium Ca 3.39 sulfur S 0.06
sodium Na 2.63 barium Ba 0.04
potassium K 2.40 nitrogen N 0.03
magnesium Mg 1.93 fluorine F 0.03
hydrogen H 0.87 strontium Sr 0.02
titanium Ti 0.58 all others - 0.47
Decomposition of Water / Production of Hydrogen
Water consists of the elements hydrogen and oxygen combined in a 2 to 1 ratio. Water can be broken down into hydrogen and
oxygen gases by the addition of energy. One way to do this is with a battery or power supply, as shown in (Figure).
Figure: The decomposition of water is shown at the mac roscopic, microscopic, and symbolic levels. The battery provides an
electric current (microscopic) that decomposes water. At the macroscopic level, the liquid separates into th e gases hydrogen (on the
left) and oxygen (on the right). Symbolically, this change is presented by showing how liquid H O separates i nto H and O gases. 2 2 2

9.2.2.7 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/203447The breakdown of water involves a rearrangement of th e atoms in water molecules into different molecules, ea ch composed of two
hydrogen atoms and two oxygen atoms, respectively. Two wate r molecules form one oxygen molecule and two hydroge n
molecules. The representation for what occurs,, will be exp lored in more depth in later chapters.
The two gases produced have distinctly different prop erties. Oxygen is not flammable but is required for com bustion of a fuel, and
hydrogen is highly flammable and a potent energy so urce. How might this knowledge be applied in our world? One application
involves research into more fuel-efficient transport ation. Fuel-cell vehicles (FCV) run on hydrogen instead of gasoline (Figure
). They are more efficient than vehicles with interna l combustion engines, are nonpolluting, and reduce gre enhouse gas
emissions, making us less dependent on fossil fuels. FCVs are not yet economically viable, however, and current hydrogen
production depends on natural gas. If we can develop a process to economically decompose water, or produce h ydrogen in another
environmentally sound way, FCVs may be the way of the futu re.
Figure: A fuel cell generates electrical energy from hydrogen and oxygen via an electrochemical process a nd produces only
water as the waste product.
Chemistry of Cell Phones
Imagine how different your life would be without cell phones (Figure) and other smart devices. Cell phone s are made from
numerous chemical substances, which are extracted, ref ined, purified, and assembled using an extensive an d in-depth
understanding of chemical principles. About 30% of th e elements that are found in nature are found within a typical smart phone.
The case/body/frame consists of a combination of stur dy, durable polymers comprised primarily of carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, and
nitrogen [acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS) and p olycarbonate thermoplastics], and light, strong, st ructural metals, such as
aluminum, magnesium, and iron. The display screen is made from a specially toughened glass (silica glass strengthened by the
addition of aluminum, sodium, and potassium) and coated with a material to make it conductive (such as indi um tin oxide). The
circuit board uses a semiconductor material (usuall y silicon); commonly used metals like copper, tin, sil ver, and gold; and more
unfamiliar elements such as yttrium, praseodymium, and gadolinium. The battery relies upon lithium ions and a variety of other
materials, including iron, cobalt, copper, polyethylene oxide, and polyacrylonitrile.

9.2.2.8 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/203447
Figure: Almost one-third of naturally occurring elements are used to make a modern cell phone. (credit: modifica tion of
work by John Taylor)
Contributors and Attributions
Summary
Matter is anything that occupies space and has mass. T he basic building block of matter is the atom, the sm allest unit of an element
that can enter into combinations with atoms of the sa me or other elements. In many substances, atoms are c ombined into
molecules. On earth, matter commonly exists in three states: solids, of fixed shape and volume; liquids, of variable shape but fixed
volume; and gases, of variable shape and volume. Under high-temperature conditions, matter also can exist as a plasma. Most
matter is a mixture: It is composed of two or more t ypes of matter that can be present in varying amount s and can be separated by
physical means. Heterogeneous mixtures vary in composit ion from point to point; homogeneous mixtures have t he same
composition from point to point. Pure substances consist of only one type of matter. A pure substance can be an element, which
consists of only one type of atom and cannot be bro ken down by a chemical change, or a compound, which con sists of two or more
types of atoms.
Glossary
atom
smallest particle of an element that can enter into a ch emical combination
compound
pure substance that can be decomposed into two or more elemen ts
element
substance that is composed of a single type of atom; a subs tance that cannot be decomposed by a chemical change
gas
state in which matter has neither definite volume nor sh ape
heterogeneous mixture
combination of substances with a composition that varies from point to point
homogeneous mixture
(also, solution) combination of substances with a compositi on that is uniform throughout
liquid
state of matter that has a definite volume but indefin ite shape
law of conservation of matter
when matter converts from one type to another or changes fo rm, there is no detectable change in the total amount o f matter
present

9.2.2.9 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/203447mass
fundamental property indicating amount of matter
matter
anything that occupies space and has mass
mixture
matter that can be separated into its components by physica l means
molecule
bonded collection of two or more atoms of the same or diffe rent elements
plasma
gaseous state of matter containing a large number of elect rically charged atoms and/or molecules
pure substance
homogeneous substance that has a constant composition
solid
state of matter that is rigid, has a definite shape, and ha s a fairly constant volume
weight
force that gravity exerts on an object
Contributors and Attributions
Paul Flowers (University of North Carolina - Pembroke), Kla us Theopold (University of Delaware) and Richard Langl ey
(Stephen F. Austin State University) with contributing au thors. Textbook content produced by OpenStax College i s licensed
under a Creative Commons Attribution License 4.0 license. Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/85abf1932bd...a7ac8df6@9.110).
This page titled 9.2.2: Phases and Classification of Matter is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
OpenStax.

9.2.3.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2034489.2.3: Physical and Chemical Properties
Identify properties of and changes in matter as physical o r chemical
Identify properties of matter as extensive or intensive
The characteristics that enable us to distinguish on e substance from another are called properties. A ph ysical property is a
characteristic of matter that is not associated with a change in its chemical composition. Familiar example s of physical properties
include density, color, hardness, melting and boiling points, and electrical conductivity. We can observe so me physical properties,
such as density and color, without changing the physi cal state of the matter observed. Other physical prop erties, such as the melting
temperature of iron or the freezing temperature of water, can only be observed as matter undergoes a phy sical change. A physical
change is a change in the state or properties of ma tter without any accompanying change in its chemical composition (the identities
of the substances contained in the matter). We obser ve a physical change when wax melts, when sugar dissolve s in coffee, and
when steam condenses into liquid water (Figure). Other ex amples of physical changes include magnetizing and
demagnetizing metals (as is done with common antithef t security tags) and grinding solids into powders (whic h can sometimes
yield noticeable changes in color). In each of thes e examples, there is a change in the physical state, form, or properties of the
substance, but no change in its chemical composition.
Figure: (a) Wax undergoes a physical change when solid wax is heated and forms liquid wax. (b) Steam condensi ng inside a
cooking pot is a physical change, as water vapor is cha nged into liquid water. (credit a: modification of work by
“95jb14”/Wikimedia Commons; credit b: modification o f work by “mjneuby”/Flickr).
The change of one type of matter into another type (or the inability to change) is a chemical property. Examples of chemical
properties include flammability, toxicity, acidity, reactivity (many types), and heat of combustion. Iron, for example, combines with
oxygen in the presence of water to form rust; chromiu m does not oxidize (Figure). Nitroglycerin is very d angerous because
it explodes easily; neon poses almost no hazard beca use it is very unreactive.
Figure: (a) One of the chemical properties of iron i s that it rusts; (b) one of the chemical properties of chromium is that it
does not. (credit a: modification of work by Tony Hi sgett; credit b: modification of work by “Atoma”/Wik imedia Commons)
To identify a chemical property, we look for a chemic al change. A chemical change always produces one or more types of matter
that differ from the matter present before the chan ge. The formation of rust is a chemical change because rust is a different kind of
matter than the iron, oxygen, and water present before the rust formed. The explosion of nitroglycerin is a chemical change because
the gases produced are very different kinds of matter from the original substance. Other examples of chemi cal changes includeLearning Objectives

9.2.3.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/203448reactions that are performed in a lab (such as copper reacting with nitric acid), all forms of combustion (burning), and food being
cooked, digested, or rotting (Figure).
Figure: (a) Copper and nitric acid undergo a chemic al change to form copper nitrate and brown, gaseous n itrogen dioxide.
(b) During the combustion of a match, cellulose in th e match and oxygen from the air undergo a chemical change to form carbon
dioxide and water vapor. (c) Cooking red meat causes a number of chemical changes, including the oxidatio n of iron in myoglobin
that results in the familiar red-to-brown color chang e. (d) A banana turning brown is a chemical change a s new, darker (and less
tasty) substances form. (credit b: modification of work by Jeff Turner; credit c: modification of work by G loria Cabada-Leman;
credit d: modification of work by Roberto Verzo)
Properties of matter fall into one of two categories. If the property depends on the amount of matter pre sent, it is an extensive
property. The mass and volume of a substance are exam ples of extensive properties; for instance, a gallon of milk has a larger mass
and volume than a cup of milk. The value of an exten sive property is directly proportional to the amoun t of matter in question. If
the property of a sample of matter does not depend o n the amount of matter present, it is an intensive property. Temperature is an
example of an intensive property. If the gallon and cup of milk are each at 20 °C (room temperature), wh en they are combined, the
temperature remains at 20 °C. As another example, co nsider the distinct but related properties of heat a nd temperature. A drop of
hot cooking oil spattered on your arm causes brief, minor discomfort, whereas a pot of hot oil yields se vere burns. Both the drop
and the pot of oil are at the same temperature (an intensive property), but the pot clearly contains muc h more heat (extensive
property).
Hazard Diamond
You may have seen the symbol shown in Figure on contain ers of chemicals in a laboratory or workplace. Sometimes called a
“fire diamond” or “hazard diamond,” this chemical h azard diamond provides valuable information that br iefly summarizes the
various dangers of which to be aware when working with a particu lar substance.

9.2.3.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/203448
Figure: The National Fire Protection Agency (NFPA) h azard diamond summarizes the major hazards of a chemic al
substance.
The National Fire Protection Agency (NFPA) 704 Hazard Ident ification System was developed by NFPA to provide safety
information about certain substances. The system deta ils flammability, reactivity, health, and other haza rds. Within the overall
diamond symbol, the top (red) diamond specifies the level of fire hazard (temperature range for flash po int). The blue (left)
diamond indicates the level of health hazard. The yel low (right) diamond describes reactivity hazards, such as how readily the
substance will undergo detonation or a violent chemic al change. The white (bottom) diamond points out speci al hazards, such as if
it is an oxidizer (which allows the substance to burn in the absence of air/oxygen), undergoes an unusual or dangerous reaction with
water, is corrosive, acidic, alkaline, a biological hazard, radioactive, and so on. Each hazard is rated on a scale from 0 to 4, with 0
being no hazard and 4 being extremely hazardous.
While many elements differ dramatically in their ch emical and physical properties, some elements have simi lar properties. We can
identify sets of elements that exhibit common behavi ors. For example, many elements conduct heat and elec tricity well, whereas
others are poor conductors. These properties can be used to sort the elements into three classes: metals (el ements that conduct
well), nonmetals (elements that conduct poorly), and meta lloids (elements that have properties of both metals and non metals).
The periodic table is a table of elements that plac es elements with similar properties close together (Figure). You will learn
more about the periodic table as you continue your stud y of chemistry.

9.2.3.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/203448
Figure: The periodic table shows how elements may be grouped according to certain similar properties. Note the
background color denotes whether an element is a meta l, metalloid, or nonmetal, whereas the element symbol color indicates
whether it is a solid, liquid, or gas.
Contributors and Attributions
Summary
All substances have distinct physical and chemical pr operties, and may undergo physical or chemical chang es. Physical properties,
such as hardness and boiling point, and physical chan ges, such as melting or freezing, do not involve a ch ange in the composition
of matter. Chemical properties, such flammability and acidity, and chemical changes, such as rusting, invo lve production of matter
that differs from that present beforehand.
Measurable properties fall into one of two categories. E xtensive properties depend on the amount of matter present, for example,
the mass of gold. Intensive properties do not depend on the amount of matter present, for example, the den sity of gold. Heat is an
example of an extensive property, and temperature is an e xample of an intensive property.
Glossary
chemical change
change producing a different kind of matter from the orig inal kind of matter
chemical property
behavior that is related to the change of one kind of matte r into another kind of matter
extensive property
property of a substance that depends on the amount of the substance
intensive property
property of a substance that is independent of the amount o f the substance
physical change

9.2.3.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/203448change in the state or properties of matter that does not involve a change in its chemical composition
physical property
characteristic of matter that is not associated with an y change in its chemical composition
Contributors and Attributions
Paul Flowers (University of North Carolina - Pembroke), Kla us Theopold (University of Delaware) and Richard Langl ey
(Stephen F. Austin State University) with contributing au thors. Textbook content produced by OpenStax College i s licensed
under a Creative Commons Attribution License 4.0 license. Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/85abf1932bd...a7ac8df6@9.110).
This page titled 9.2.3: Physical and Chemical Properties is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
OpenStax.

9.2.4.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2034499.2.4: Measurements
Explain the process of measurement
Identify the three basic parts of a quantity
Describe the properties and units of length, mass, volume, density, temperature, and time
Perform basic unit calculations and conversions in the metric and other unit systems
Measurements provide the macroscopic information that is the basis of most of the hypotheses, theories, an d laws that describe the
behavior of matter and energy in both the macroscop ic and microscopic domains of chemistry. Every measur ement provides three
kinds of information: the size or magnitude of the measurement (a number); a standard of comparison fo r the measurement (a unit);
and an indication of the uncertainty of the measure ment. While the number and unit are explicitly repre sented when a quantity is
written, the uncertainty is an aspect of the measurement r esult that is more implicitly represented and will be discus sed later.
The number in the measurement can be represented in different ways, including decimal form and scientific notation. For example,
the maximum takeoff weight of a Boeing 777-200ER air liner is 298,000 kilograms, which can also be written as 2.98 10 kg.
The mass of the average mosquito is about 0.0000025 kilo grams, which can be written as 2.5 10 kg.
Units, such as liters, pounds, and centimeters, are sta ndards of comparison for measurements. When we buy a 2 -liter bottle of a soft
drink, we expect that the volume of the drink was measu red, so it is two times larger than the volume that ev eryone agrees to be 1
liter. The meat used to prepare a 0.25-pound hamburger is measured so it weighs one-fourth as much as 1 pound. Without units, a
number can be meaningless, confusing, or possibly life threatening. Suppose a doctor prescribes phenobarbita l to control a patient’s
seizures and states a dosage of “100” without specif ying units. Not only will this be confusing to the me dical professional giving
the dose, but the consequences can be dire: 100 mg given three times per day can be effective as an ant iconvulsant, but a single
dose of 100 g is more than 10 times the lethal amount.
We usually report the results of scientific measurem ents in SI units, an updated version of the metric sy stem, using the units listed
in Table. Other units can be derived from these base units. The standards for these units are fixed by in ternational agreement,
and they are called the International System of Units or SI Units (from the French, Le Système International d’Unités). SI units
have been used by the United States National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) since 1964.
Table: Base Units of the SI System
Property Measured Name of Unit Symbol of Unit
length meter m
mass kilogram kg
time second s
temperature kelvin K
electric current ampere A
amount of substance mole mol
luminous intensity candela cd
Sometimes we use units that are fractions or multiples o f a base unit. Ice cream is sold in quarts (a famili ar, non-SI base unit), pints
(0.5 quart), or gallons (4 quarts). We also use fracti ons or multiples of units in the SI system, but these f ractions or multiples are
always powers of 10. Fractional or multiple SI units are named using a prefix and the name of the base unit. For example, a length
of 1000 meters is also called a kilometer because th e prefix kilo means “one thousand,” which in scientific notation i s 10 (1
kilometer = 1000 m = 10 m). The prefixes used and the po wers to which 10 are raised are listed in Table.
Table: Common Unit PrefixesLearning Objectives
−6

9.2.4.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/203449Prefix Symbol Factor Example
femto f 101 femtosecond (fs) = 1 10
s (0.000000000000001 s)
pico p 101 picometer (pm) = 1 10 m
(0.000000000001 m)
nano n 104 nanograms (ng) = 4 10 g
(0.000000004 g)
micro µ 101 microliter (μL) = 1 10 L
(0.000001 L)
milli m 102 millimoles (mmol) = 2 10
mol (0.002 mol)
centi c 107 centimeters (cm) = 7 10
m (0.07 m)
deci d 101 deciliter (dL) = 1 10 L
(0.1 L)
kilo k 101 kilometer (km) = 1 10 m
(1000 m)
mega M 103 megahertz (MHz) = 3 10
Hz (3,000,000 Hz)
giga G 108 gigayears (Gyr) = 8 10 yr
(8,000,000,000 Gyr)
tera T 105 terawatts (TW) = 5 10 W
(5,000,000,000,000 W)
SI Base Units
The initial units of the metric system, which eventua lly evolved into the SI system, were established in Fr ance during the French
Revolution. The original standards for the meter and the kilogram were adopted there in 1799 and eventual ly by other countries.
This section introduces four of the SI base units com monly used in chemistry. Other SI units will be introd uced in subsequent
chapters.
Length
The standard unit of length in both the SI and origi nal metric systems is the meter (m). A meter was ori ginally specified as
1/10,000,000 of the distance from the North Pole to th e equator. It is now defined as the distance light i n a vacuum travels in
1/299,792,458 of a second. A meter is about 3 inches longer than a yard (Figure); one meter is about 39.3 7 inches or 1.094
yards. Longer distances are often reported in kilomet ers (1 km = 1000 m = 10 m), whereas shorter distances c an be reported in
centimeters (1 cm = 0.01 m = 10 m) or millimeters (1 mm = 0.00 1 m = 10 m).−15−15
−12−12
−9−9
−6−6
−3−3
−2−2
−1−1
−2 −3

9.2.4.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/203449
Figure: The relative lengths of 1 m, 1 yd, 1 cm, and 1 in. are shown (not actual size), as well as compariso ns of 2.54 cm and
1 in., and of 1 m and 1.094 yd.
Mass
The standard unit of mass in the SI system is the kilo gram (kg). A kilogram was originally defined as the mass of a liter of water (a
cube of water with an edge length of exactly 0.1 meter). It is now defined by a certain cylinder of platinu m-iridium alloy, which is
kept in France (Figure 1.4.2). Any object with the same ma ss as this cylinder is said to have a mass of 1 kilo gram. One kilogram is
about 2.2 pounds. The gram (g) is exactly equal to 1/10 00 of the mass of the kilogram (10 kg).
Figure: This replica prototype kilogram is housed at t he National Institute of Standards and Technology (NI ST) in Maryland.
(credit: National Institutes of Standards and Technolog y).
Temperature
Temperature is an intensive property. The SI unit of temperature is the kelvin (K). The IUPAC convention is to use kelvin (all
lowercase) for the word, K (uppercase) for the unit symb ol, and neither the word “degree” nor the degree symb ol (°). The degree
Celsius (°C) is also allowed in the SI system, with both th e word “degree” and the degree symbol used for Celsiu s measurements.
Celsius degrees are the same magnitude as those of kelvin, but the two scales place their zeros in different pla ces. Water freezes at
273.15 K (0 °C) and boils at 373.15 K (100 °C) by def inition, and normal human body temperature is approx imately 310 K (37
°C). The conversion between these two units and the Fahren heit scale will be discussed later in this chapter.
Time
The SI base unit of time is the second (s). Small and la rge time intervals can be expressed with the appropri ate prefixes; for
example, 3 microseconds = 0.000003 s = 3 10 and 5 m egaseconds = 5,000,000 s = 5 10 s. Alternatively, hour s, days, and
years can be used.
Derived SI Units
We can derive many units from the seven SI base units. Fo r example, we can use the base unit of length to def ine a unit of volume,
and the base units of mass and length to define a unit of den sity.−3
−6 6

9.2.4.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/203449Volume
V olume is the measure of the amount of space occupie d by an object. The standard SI unit of volume is defi ned by the base unit of
length (Figure). The standard volume is a cubic mete r (m), a cube with an edge length of exactly one met er. To dispense a
cubic meter of water, we could build a cubic box with edge lengths of exactly one meter. This box would hol d a cubic meter of
water or any other substance.
A more commonly used unit of volume is derived from the decimeter (0.1 m, or 10 cm). A cube with edge len gths of exactly one
decimeter contains a volume of one cubic decimeter (dm). A liter (L) is the more common name for the cu bic decimeter. One liter
is about 1.06 quarts. A cubic centimeter (cm) is the v olume of a cube with an edge length of exactly one c entimeter. The
abbreviation cc (for cubic centimeter) is often used by health professionals. A c ubic centimeter is also called a milliliter (mL) and is
1/1000 of a liter.
Figure: (a) The relative volumes are shown for cubes o f 1 m, 1 dm (1 L), and 1 cm (1 mL) (not to scale). (b) The diameter
of a dime is compared relative to the edge length of a 1-cm (1-mL) cube.
Density
We use the mass and volume of a substance to determine its density. Thus, the units of density are defined by the base units of mass
and length.
The density of a substance is the ratio of the mass of a sample of the substance to its volume. The SI unit for density is the kilogram
per cubic meter (kg/m). For many situations, however, t his as an inconvenient unit, and we often use grams pe r cubic centimeter
(g/cm) for the densities of solids and liquids, and gr ams per liter (g/L) for gases. Although there are exc eptions, most liquids and
solids have densities that range from about 0.7 g/c m (the density of gasoline) to 19 g/cm (the density of gold). The density of air
is about 1.2 g/L. Table shows the densities of some common substances.
Table: Densities of Common Substances
Solids Liquids Gases (at 25 °C and 1 atm)
ice (at 0 °C) 0.92 g/cm water 1.0 g/cm dry air 1.20 g /L
oak (wood) 0.60–0.90 g/cm ethanol 0.79 g/cm oxygen 1. 31 g/L
iron 7.9 g/cm acetone 0.79 g/cm nitrogen 1.14 g/L
copper 9.0 g/cm glycerin 1.26 g/cm carbon dioxide 1.8 0 g/L
lead 11.3 g/cm olive oil 0.92 g/cm helium 0.16 g/L
silver 10.5 g/cm gasoline 0.70–0.77 g/cm neon 0.83 g/L
gold 19.3 g/cm mercury 13.6 g/cm radon 9.1 g/L3
3 3 3
3 3
3 3
3 3
3 3
3 3
3 3
3 3
3 3

9.2.4.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/203449While there are many ways to determine the density of an object, perhaps the most straightforward method i nvolves separately
finding the mass and volume of the object, and then dividing the mass of the sample by its volume. In t he following example, the
mass is found directly by weighing, but the volume is found indirectly through length measurements.
Calculation of Density Gold—in bricks, bars, and coin s—has been a form of currency for centuries. In order t o swindle people
into paying for a brick of gold without actually inv esting in a brick of gold, people have considered fi lling the centers of
hollow gold bricks with lead to fool buyers into think ing that the entire brick is gold. It does not work: Lead is a dense
substance, but its density is not as great as that of g old, 19.3 g/cm. What is the density of lead if a cu be of lead has an edge
length of 2.00 cm and a mass of 90.7 g?
Solution
The density of a substance can be calculated by div iding its mass by its volume. The volume of a cube is c alculated by cubing
the edge length.
(We will discuss the reason for rounding to the first decima l place in the next section.)
a. To three decimal places, what is the volume of a cube (cm) with an edge length of 0.843 cm?
b. If the cube in part (a) is copper and has a mass of 5.34 g, wh at is the density of copper to two decimal places?
Answer a
0.599 cm;
Answer b
8.91 g/cm
This PhET simulation illustrates another way to determine density, using displacement of water. Determine the density of the
red and yellow blocks.
Solution
When you open the density simulation and select Same Mass, you can choose from several 5.00-kg colored block s that you can
drop into a tank containing 100.00 L water. The yell ow block floats (it is less dense than water), and the water level rises to
105.00 L. While floating, the yellow block displaces 5. 00 L water, an amount equal to the weight of the bloc k. The red block
sinks (it is more dense than water, which has density = 1.00 kg/L), and the water level rises to 101.25 L.
The red block therefore displaces 1.25 L water, an amount equal to the volume of the block. The density of the red block is:
Note that since the yellow block is not completely sub merged, you cannot determine its density from this in formation. But if
you hold the yellow block on the bottom of the tank, the water level rises to 110.00 L, which means that it now displaces 10.00
L water, and its density can be found:Example
Exercise
Example: Using Displacement of Water to Determine Density

9.2.4.6 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/203449Remove all of the blocks from the water and add the green block to the tank of water, placing it approxi mately in the middle of
the tank. Determine the density of the green block.
Answer
2.00 kg/L
Summary
Measurements provide quantitative information that i s critical in studying and practicing chemistry. Eac h measurement has an
amount, a unit for comparison, and an uncertainty. Me asurements can be represented in either decimal or scientific notation.
Scientists primarily use the SI (International System) or metric systems. We use base SI units such as meters, s econds, and
kilograms, as well as derived units, such as liters (for v olume) and g/cm (for density). In many cases, we find it convenient to use
unit prefixes that yield fractional and multiple units, such as microseconds (10 seconds) and megahertz (10 hert z), respectively.
Key Equations
Glossary
Celsius (°C)
unit of temperature; water freezes at 0 °C and boils at 100 °C on this scale
cubic centimeter (cm or cc)
volume of a cube with an edge length of exactly 1 cm
cubic meter (m)
SI unit of volume
density
ratio of mass to volume for a substance or object
kelvin (K)
SI unit of temperature; 273.15 K = 0 ºC
kilogram (kg)
standard SI unit of mass; 1 kg = approximately 2.2 pound s
length
measure of one dimension of an object
liter (L)
(also, cubic decimeter) unit of volume; 1 L = 1,000 cm
meter (m)
standard metric and SI unit of length; 1 m = approximate ly 1.094 yards
milliliter (mL)
1/1,000 of a liter; equal to 1 cmExercise
−6 6

9.2.4.7 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/203449second (s)
SI unit of time
SI units (International System of Units)
standards fixed by international agreement in the Interna tional System of Units (Le Système International d’Unités)
unit
standard of comparison for measurements
volume
amount of space occupied by an object
Contributors and Attributions
Paul Flowers (University of North Carolina - Pembroke), Kla us Theopold (University of Delaware) and Richard Langl ey
(Stephen F. Austin State University) with contributing au thors. Textbook content produced by OpenStax College i s licensed
under a Creative Commons Attribution License 4.0 license. Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/85abf1932bd...a7ac8df6@9.110).
This page titled 9.2.4: Measurements is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax.

9.2.5.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2034509.2.5: Measurement Uncertainty, Accuracy, and Precision
Define accuracy and precision
Distinguish exact and uncertain numbers
Correctly represent uncertainty in quantities using sign ificant figures
Apply proper rounding rules to computed quantities
Counting is the only type of measurement that is free from uncertainty, provided the number of objects be ing counted does not
change while the counting process is underway. The res ult of such a counting measurement is an example of an exact number. If we
count eggs in a carton, we know exactly how many eggs the carton contains. The numbers of defin ed quantities are also exact. By
definition, 1 foot is exactly 12 inches, 1 inch is exac tly 2.54 centimeters, and 1 gram is exactly 0.001 kilo gram. Quantities derived
from measurements other than counting, however, are unc ertain to varying extents due to practical limitatio ns of the measurement
process used.
Significant Figures in Measurement
The numbers of measured quantities, unlike defined or directly counted quantities, are not exact. To measu re the volume of liquid
in a graduated cylinder, you should make a reading at the bottom of the meniscus, the lowest point on the c urved surface of the
liquid.
Figure: To measure the volume of liquid in this graduated cy linder, you must mentally subdivide the distance betwe en the
21 and 22 mL marks into tenths of a milliliter, and t hen make a reading (estimate) at the bottom of the m eniscus.
Refer to the illustration in Figure. The bottom of the meniscus in this case clearly lies between the 21 a nd 22 markings,
meaning the liquid volume is certainly greater than 21 mL but less than 22 mL. The meniscus appears to be a bit closer to the 22mL mark than to the 21-mL mark, and so a reasonable e stimate of the liquid’s volume would be 21.6 mL. In t he number 21.6, then,
the digits 2 and 1 are certain, but the 6 is an estim ate. Some people might estimate the meniscus position to be equally distant from
each of the markings and estimate the tenth-place di git as 5, while others may think it to be even closer to the 22-mL mark and
estimate this digit to be 7. Note that it would be poi ntless to attempt to estimate a digit for the hundre dths place, given that the
tenths-place digit is uncertain. In general, numerica l scales such as the one on this graduated cylinder will permit measurements to
one-tenth of the smallest scale division. The scale i n this case has 1-mL divisions, and so volumes may be measured to the nearest
0.1 mL.
This concept holds true for all measurements, even if you do not actively make an estimate. If you place a quarter on a standard
electronic balance, you may obtain a reading of 6.72 g. The digits 6 and 7 are certain, and the 2 indica tes that the mass of the
quarter is likely between 6.71 and 6.73 grams. The quart er weighs about 6.72 grams, with a nominal uncertainty in the
measurement of ± 0.01 gram. If we weigh the quarter o n a more sensitive balance, we may find that its mass is 6.723 g. This means
its mass lies between 6.722 and 6.724 grams, an uncertai nty of 0.001 gram. Every measurement has some uncert ainty, which
depends on the device used (and the user’s ability). All of the digits in a measurement, including the un certain last digit, are called
significant figures or significant digits. Note that zero may be a measured value; for example, if you st and on a scale that shows
weight to the nearest pound and it shows “120,” then the 1 (hundreds), 2 (tens) and 0 (ones) are all significant (measur ed) values.Learning Objectives

9.2.5.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/203450Whenever you make a measurement properly, all the d igits in the result are significant. But what if you were analyzing a reported
value and trying to determine what is significant an d what is not? Well, for starters, all nonzero digits ar e significant, and it is only
zeros that require some thought. We will use the terms “leading,” “trailing,” and “captive” for the zeros an d will consider how to
deal with them.
Starting with the first nonzero digit on the left, cou nt this digit and all remaining digits to the right. This is the number of significant
figures in the measurement unless the last digit is a trai ling zero lying to the left of the decimal point.
Captive zeros result from measurement and are theref ore always significant. Leading zeros, however, are neve r significant—they
merely tell us where the decimal point is located.
The leading zeros in this example are not significant. We could use exponential notation (as described in Ap pendix B) and express
the number as 8.32407 10; then the number 8.32407 cont ains all of the significant figures, and 10 locates the d ecimal point.
The number of significant figures is uncertain in a number that ends with a zero to the left of the deci mal point location. The zeros
in the measurement 1,300 grams could be significant or they could simply indicate where the decimal point is located. The
ambiguity can be resolved with the use of exponential notation: 1.3 10 (two significant figures), 1.30 10 (three significant
figures, if the tens place was measured), or 1.300 10 (four significant figures, if the ones place was also me asured). In cases
where only the decimal-formatted number is available, it is prudent to assume that all trailing zeros are not s ignificant.
When determining significant figures, be sure to pay a ttention to reported values and think about the mea surement and significant
figures in terms of what is reasonable or likely—that i s, whether the value makes sense. For example, the offi cial January 2014
census reported the resident population of the US as 317,297,725. Do you think the US population was correctly de termined to the
reported nine significant figures, that is, to the exact number of people? People are constantly being born, dying, or moving into or
out of the country, and assumptions are made to acco unt for the large number of people who are not actual ly counted. Because of
these uncertainties, it might be more reasonable to exp ect that we know the population to within perhaps a mi llion or so, in which
case the population should be reported as 317 million, or people.
Significant Figures in Calculations
A second important principle of uncertainty is that results calculated from a measurement are at least as uncertain as the
measurement itself. We must take the uncertainty in our measurements into account to avoid misrepresent ing the uncertainty in
calculated results. One way to do this is to report the result of a calculation with the correct number of sign ificant figures, which is
determined by the following three rules for rounding num bers:−3 −3
3 3

9.2.5.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2034501. When we add or subtract numbers, we should round the result to the same number of decimal places as the number with the
least number of decimal places (the least precise value i n terms of addition and subtraction).
2. When we multiply or divide numbers, we should round the r esult to the same number of digits as the number with the least
number of significant figures (the least precise value in te rms of multiplication and division).
3. If the digit to be dropped (the one immediately to the right of the digit to be retained) is less than 5, we “rou nd down” and leave
the retained digit unchanged; if it is more than 5, we “rou nd up” and increase the retained digit by 1; if the dr opped digit is 5,
we round up or down, whichever yields an even value for the r etained digit. (The last part of this rule may strike you as a bit
odd, but it’s based on reliable statistics and is aimed at avo iding any bias when dropping the digit “5,” since it is equally close to
both possible values of the retained digit.)
The following examples illustrate the application of t his rule in rounding a few different numbers to three signifi cant figures:
0.028675 rounds “up” to 0.0287 (the dropped digit, 7, i s greater than 5)
18.3384 rounds “down” to 18.3 (the dropped digit, 3, is les s than 5)
6.8752 rounds “up” to 6.88 (the dropped digit is 5, and the retained digit is even)
92.85 rounds “down” to 92.8 (the dropped digit is 5, and th e retained digit is even)
Let’s work through these rules with a few examples.
Round the following to the indicated number of significant figures:
a. 31.57 (to two significant figures)
b. 8.1649 (to three significant figures)
c. 0.051065 (to four significant figures)
d. 0.90275 (to four significant figures)
Solution
a. 31.57 rounds “up” to 32 (the dropped digit is 5, and the r etained digit is even)
b. 8.1649 rounds “down” to 8.16 (the dropped digit, 4, is le ss than 5)
c. 0.051065 rounds “down” to 0.05106 (the dropped digit i s 5, and the retained digit is even)
d. 0.90275 rounds “up” to 0.9028 (the dropped digit is 5, and the retained digit is even)
Round the following to the indicated number of significant figures:
a. 0.424 (to two significant figures)
b. 0.0038661 (to three significant figures)
c. 421.25 (to four significant figures)
d. 28,683.5 (to five significant figures)
Answer a
0.42
Answer b
0.00387
Answer c
421.2
Answer d
28,684Example: Rounding Numbers
Exercise

9.2.5.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/203450When we add or subtract numbers, we should round the re sult to the same number of decimal places as the num ber with the
least number of decimal places (i.e., the least precise v alue in terms of addition and subtraction).
a. Add 1.0023 g and 4.383 g.
b. Subtract 421.23 g from 486 g.
Solution
(a)
Answer is 5.385 g (round to the thousandths place; three de cimal places)
(b)
Answer is 65 g (round to the ones place; no decimal places)
a. Add 2.334 mL and 0.31 mL.
b. Subtract 55.8752 m from 56.533 m.
Answer a
2.64 mL
Answer b
0.658 m
Rule: When we multiply or divide numbers, we should ro und the result to the same number of digits as the n umber with the
least number of significant figures (the least precise va lue in terms of multiplication and division).
a. Multiply 0.6238 cm by 6.6 cm.
b. Divide 421.23 g by 486 mL.
Solution
(a)Example: Addition and Subtraction with Significant Figures Rule:
Exercise
Example: Multiplication and Division with Significant Figures

9.2.5.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/203450(b)
a. Multiply 2.334 cm and 0.320 cm.
b. Divide 55.8752 m by 56.53 s.
Answer a
0.747 cm
Answer b
0.9884 m/s
In the midst of all these technicalities, it is import ant to keep in mind the reason why we use significant figures and rounding rules
—to correctly represent the certainty of the values we report and to ensure that a calculated result is n ot represented as being more
certain than the least certain value used in the calcul ation.
One common bathtub is 13.44 dm long, 5.920 dm wide, and 2.54 dm deep. Assume that the tub is rectangular and ca lculate its
approximate volume in liters.
Solution
What is the density of a liquid with a mass of 31.1415 g and a volume of 30.13 cm?
Answer
1.034 g/mL
A piece of rebar is weighed and then submerged in a graduate d cylinder partially filled with water, with results as shown.Exercise
Example: Calculation with Significant Figures
Exercise: Determination of Density Using Water Displacement
Example

9.2.5.6 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/203450
a. Use these values to determine the density of this piece of rebar.
b. Rebar is mostly iron. Does your result in (a) support thi s statement? How?
Solution
The volume of the piece of rebar is equal to the volume of the water displaced:
(rounded to the nearest 0.1 mL, per the rule for addition and subtraction)
The density is the mass-to-volume ratio:
(rounded to two significant figures, per the rule for mult iplication and division)
The density of iron is 7.9 g/cm, very close to that of rebar, which lends some support to the fact that rebar is mostly ir on.
An irregularly shaped piece of a shiny yellowish materi al is weighed and then submerged in a graduated cyli nder, with results
as shown.
a. Use these values to determine the density of this materia l.
b. Do you have any reasonable guesses as to the identity of t his material? Explain your reasoning.
Answer a
19 g/cm
Answer b3
Exercise

9.2.5.7 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/203450It is likely gold; it has the right appearance for gold and very close to the density given for gold.
Accuracy and Precision
Scientists typically make repeated measurements of a quantity to ensure the quality of their findings an d to know both the precision
and the accuracy of their results. Measurements are s aid to be precise if they yield very similar results when repeated in the same
manner. A measurement is considered accurate if it yie lds a result that is very close to the true or accept ed value. Precise values
agree with each other; accurate values agree with a tru e value. These characterizations can be extended to other contexts, such as
the results of an archery competition (Figure).
Figure: (a) These arrows are close to both the bull’s e ye and one another, so they are both accurate and pr ecise. (b) These
arrows are close to one another but not on target, so they are precise but not accurate. (c) These arrows ar e neither on target nor
close to one another, so they are neither accurate no r precise.
Suppose a quality control chemist at a pharmaceutical company is tasked with checking the accuracy and prec ision of three
different machines that are meant to dispense 10 ounce s (296 mL) of cough syrup into storage bottles. She p roceeds to use each
machine to fill five bottles and then carefully det ermines the actual volume dispensed, obtaining the re sults tabulated in Table
Table: V olume (mL) of Cough Medicine Delivered by 10-oz (296 mL) Dispensers
Dispenser #1 Dispenser #2 Dispenser #3
283.3 298.3 296.1
284.1 294.2 295.9
283.9 296.0 296.1
284.0 297.8 296.0
284.1 293.9 296.1
Considering these results, she will report that dispenser #1 is precise (values all close to one another, withi n a few tenths of a
milliliter) but not accurate (none of the values ar e close to the target value of 296 mL, each being mo re than 10 mL too low).
Results for dispenser #2 represent improved accuracy (each volume is less than 3 mL away from 296 mL) but wor se precision
(volumes vary by more than 4 mL). Finally, she can re port that dispenser #3 is working well, dispensing coug h syrup both
accurately (all volumes within 0.1 mL of the target volume) and precisely (volumes differing from each other by no more than 0.2
mL).
Summary
Quantities can be exact or measured. Measured quantitie s have an associated uncertainty that is represented by the number of
significant figures in the measurement. The uncertai nty of a calculated value depends on the uncertainti es in the values used in the
calculation and is reflected in how the value is roun ded. Measured values can be accurate (close to the t rue value) and/or precise
(showing little variation when measured repeatedly).
Glossary
uncertainty

9.2.5.8 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/203450estimate of amount by which measurement differs from tru e value
significant figures
(also, significant digits) all of the measured digits in a det ermination, including the uncertain last digit
rounding
procedure used to ensure that calculated results properly reflect the uncertainty in the measurements used in the c alculation
precision
how closely a measurement matches the same measurement whe n repeated
exact number
number derived by counting or by definition
accuracy
how closely a measurement aligns with a correct value
Contributors and Attributions
Paul Flowers (University of North Carolina - Pembroke), Kla us Theopold (University of Delaware) and Richard Langl ey
(Stephen F. Austin State University) with contributing au thors. Textbook content produced by OpenStax College i s licensed
under a Creative Commons Attribution License 4.0 license. Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/85abf1932bd...a7ac8df6@9.110).
This page titled 9.2.5: Measurement Uncertainty, Accuracy, and Precisi on is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by OpenStax.

9.2.6.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2034519.2.6: Mathematical Treatment of Measurement Results
Explain the dimensional analysis (factor label) appro ach to mathematical calculations involving quantities
Use dimensional analysis to carry out unit conversions for a gi ven property and computations involving two or more
properties
It is often the case that a quantity of interest may not be easy (or even possible) to measure directly bu t instead must be calculated
from other directly measured properties and appropri ate mathematical relationships. For example, conside r measuring the average
speed of an athlete running sprints. This is typical ly accomplished by measuring the time required for the athlete to run from the
starting line to the finish line, and the distance between these two lines, and then computing speed from the equation that relates
these three properties:
An Olympic-quality sprinter can run 100 m in approximat ely 10 s, corresponding to an average speed of
Note that this simple arithmetic involves dividing the numbers of each measured quantity to yield the numb er of the computed
quantity (100/10 = 10) and likewise dividing the units of each measured quantity to yi eld the unit of the computed quantity (m/s =
m/s). Now, consider using this same relation to predic t the time required for a person running at this sp eed to travel a distance of 25
m. The same relation between the three properties is used, but in this case, the two quantities provided ar e a speed (10 m/s) and a
distance (25 m). To yield the sought property, time, the equation must be rearranged appropriately:
The time can then be computed as:
Again, arithmetic on the numbers (25/10 = 2.5) was acco mpanied by the same arithmetic on the units (m/m/s = s) to yield the
number and unit of the result, 2.5 s. Note that, just as for numbers, when a unit is divided by an identica l unit (in this case, m/m),
the result is “1”—or, as commonly phrased, the units “canc el.”
These calculations are examples of a versatile mathe matical approach known as dimensional analysis (or th e factor-label method).
Dimensional analysis is based on this premise: the units of quantities must be subjected to the same ma thematical operations as
their associated numbers. This method can be applied to computations rangin g from simple unit conversions to more complex,
multi-step calculations involving several different q uantities.
Conversion Factors and Dimensional Analysis
A ratio of two equivalent quantities expressed with d ifferent measurement units can be used as a unit con version factor. For
example, the lengths of 2.54 cm and 1 in. are equiva lent (by definition), and so a unit conversion factor may be derived from the
ratio,
Several other commonly used conversion factors are given i n Table.
Table: Common Conversion FactorsLearning Objectives

9.2.6.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/203451Length Volume Mass
1 m = 1.0936 yd 1 L = 1.0567 qt 1 kg = 2.2046 lb
1 in. = 2.54 cm (exact) 1 qt = 0.94635 L 1 lb = 453.5 9 g
1 km = 0.62137 mi 1 ft = 28.317 L 1 (avoirdupois) oz = 28.349 g
1 mi = 1609.3 m 1 tbsp = 14.787 mL 1 (troy) oz = 31.10 3 g
When we multiply a quantity (such as distance given i n inches) by an appropriate unit conversion factor, we convert the quantity to
an equivalent value with different units (such as di stance in centimeters). For example, a basketball playe r’s vertical jump of 34
inches can be converted to centimeters by:
Since this simple arithmetic involves quantities, the premise of dimensional analysis requires that we multiply both numbers and
units. The numbers of these two quantities are multiplied to yield the number of the product quantity, 86, wh ereas the units are
multiplied to yield
Just as for numbers, a ratio of identical units is also nume rically equal to one,
and the unit product thus simplifies to cm. (When identical units divide to yield a factor of 1, they are said to “cancel.”) Using
dimensional analysis, we can determine that a unit c onversion factor has been set up correctly by checki ng to confirm that the
original unit will cancel, and the result will contain th e sought (converted) unit.
The mass of a competition Frisbee is 125 g. Convert i ts mass to ounces using the unit conversion factor der ived from the
relationship 1 oz = 28.349 g (Table).
Solution
If we have the conversion factor, we can determine the mass in kilograms using an equation similar the one u sed for converting
length from inches to centimeters.
We write the unit conversion factor in its two forms:
The correct unit conversion factor is the ratio that ca ncels the units of grams and leaves ounces.3
Example: Using a Unit Conversion Factor

9.2.6.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/203451Convert a volume of 9.345 qt to liters.
Answer
8.844 L
Beyond simple unit conversions, the factor-label me thod can be used to solve more complex problems inv olving computations.
Regardless of the details, the basic approach is the same—all the factors involved in the calculation must be appropriately oriented
to insure that their labels (units) will appropriately cancel and/or combine to yield the desired unit in the result. This is why it is
referred to as the factor-label method. As your study of chemistry continues, you will encounter many oppo rtunities to apply this
approach.
What is the density of common antifreeze in units of g/mL? A 4.00-qt sample of the antifreeze weighs 9.26 lb.
Solution
Since, we need to divide the mass in grams by the vol ume in milliliters. In general: the number of units of B
= the number of units of A unit conversion factor. T he necessary conversion factors are given in Table 1.7.1: 1 lb = 453.59 g;
1 L = 1.0567 qt; 1 L = 1,000 mL. We can convert mass fro m pounds to grams in one step:
We need to use two steps to convert volume from quarts to m illiliters.
1. Convert quarts to liters.
2. Convert liters to milliliters.
Then,
Alternatively, the calculation could be set up in a way th at uses three unit conversion factors sequentially as f ollows:
What is the volume in liters of 1.000 oz, given that 1 L = 1.0567 qt and 1 qt = 32 oz (exactly)?
AnswerExercise
Example: Computing Quantities from Measurement Results
Exercise

9.2.6.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/203451While being driven from Philadelphia to Atlanta, a dist ance of about 1250 km, a 2014 Lamborghini Aventador Roadster uses
213 L gasoline.
a. What (average) fuel economy, in miles per gallon, did th e Roadster get during this trip?
b. If gasoline costs $3.80 per gallon, what was the fuel co st for this trip?
Solution
(a) We first convert distance from kilometers to miles:
and then convert volume from liters to gallons:
Then,
Alternatively, the calculation could be set up in a way th at uses all the conversion factors sequentially, as fol lows:
(b) Using the previously calculated volume in gallons, we f ind:
A Toyota Prius Hybrid uses 59.7 L gasoline to drive fr om San Francisco to Seattle, a distance of 1300 km (two significant
digits).
a. What (average) fuel economy, in miles per gallon, did th e Prius get during this trip?
b. If gasoline costs $3.90 per gallon, what was the fuel co st for this trip?
Answer a
51 mpg
Answer b
$62
Conversion of Temperature Units
We use the word temperature to refer to the hotness o r coldness of a substance. One way we measure a change in temperature is to
use the fact that most substances expand when their tem perature increases and contract when their temperatu re decreases. The
mercury or alcohol in a common glass thermometer cha nges its volume as the temperature changes. Because th e volume of the
liquid changes more than the volume of the glass, we c an see the liquid expand when it gets warmer and contra ct when it gets
cooler.
To mark a scale on a thermometer, we need a set of ref erence values: Two of the most commonly used are the freezing and boiling
temperatures of water at a specified atmospheric pre ssure. On the Celsius scale, 0 °C is defined as the f reezing temperature of water
and 100 °C as the boiling temperature of water. The space between the two temperatures is divided into 100 equal intervals, whichExample: Computing Quantities from Measurement Results
Exercise

9.2.6.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/203451we call degrees. On the Fahrenheit scale, the freezing p oint of water is defined as 32 °F and the boiling temp erature as 212 °F. The
space between these two points on a Fahrenheit thermometer is divided into 180 equal parts (degrees).
Defining the Celsius and Fahrenheit temperature scale s as described in the previous paragraph results in a slightly more complex
relationship between temperature values on these two sc ales than for different units of measure for other p roperties. Most
measurement units for a given property are directly proportional to one another (y = mx). Using familiar length units as one
example:
where
y = length in feet,
x = length in inches, and
the proportionality constant, m, is the conversion factor.
The Celsius and Fahrenheit temperature scales, however, d o not share a common zero point, and so the relationshi p between these
two scales is a linear one rather than a proportional one (). Consequently, converting a temperature from one of these
scales into the other requires more than simple mul tiplication by a conversion factor, m, it also must t ake into account differences
in the scales’ zero points ().
The linear equation relating Celsius and Fahrenheit temperatures is easily derived from the two temperat ures used to define each
scale. Representing the Celsius temperature as and t he Fahrenheit temperature as, the slope,, is computed to be:
The y-intercept of the equation, b, is then calculated using either of the equivalent temperature pairs, (100 °C, 212 °F) or (0 °C, 32
°F), as:
The equation relating the temperature scales is then:
An abbreviated form of this equation that omits the measu rement units is:
Rearrangement of this equation yields the form useful for converting from Fahrenheit to Celsius:
As mentioned earlier in this chapter, the SI unit of te mperature is the kelvin (K). Unlike the Celsius and Fahre nheit scales, the
kelvin scale is an absolute temperature scale in whic h 0 (zero) K corresponds to the lowest temperature tha t can theoretically be
achieved. The early 19th-century discovery of the r elationship between a gas's volume and temperature su ggested that the volume
of a gas would be zero at −273.15 °C. In 1848, Britis h physicist William Thompson, who later adopted the tit le of Lord Kelvin,

9.2.6.6 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/203451proposed an absolute temperature scale based on this concept (further treatment of this topic is provid ed in this text’s chapter on
gases).
The freezing temperature of water on this scale is 2 73.15 K and its boiling temperature 373.15 K. Notice the numerical difference
in these two reference temperatures is 100, the same as for the Celsius scale, and so the linear relation be tween these two
temperature scales will exhibit a slope of. Following the same approach, the equations for converting bet ween the kelvin and
Celsius temperature scales are derived to be:
The 273.15 in these equations has been determined e xperimentally, so it is not exact. Figure shows the relationship among
the three temperature scales. Recall that we do not use the d egree sign with temperatures on the kelvin scale.
Figure: The Fahrenheit, Celsius, and kelvin temperature scales are compared.
Although the kelvin (absolute) temperature scale is t he official SI temperature scale, Celsius is commonly u sed in many scientific
contexts and is the scale of choice for nonscience con texts in almost all areas of the world. Very few count ries (the U.S. and its
territories, the Bahamas, Belize, Cayman Islands, and Pala u) still use Fahrenheit for weather, medicine, and cookin g.
Normal body temperature has been commonly accepted a s 37.0 °C (although it varies depending on time of d ay and method of
measurement, as well as among individuals). What is this tem perature on the kelvin scale and on the Fahrenheit scale?
Solution
Convert 80.92 °C to K and °F.
Answer
354.07 K, 177.7 °FExample: Conversion from Celsius
Exercise

9.2.6.7 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/203451Baking a ready-made pizza calls for an oven tempera ture of 450 °F. If you are in Europe, and your oven thermometer uses the
Celsius scale, what is the setting? What is the kelvin temper ature?
Solution
Convert 50 °F to °C and K.
Answer
10 °C, 280 K
Summary
Measurements are made using a variety of units. It is of ten useful or necessary to convert a measured quantity from one unit into
another. These conversions are accomplished using uni t conversion factors, which are derived by simple ap plications of a
mathematical approach called the factor-label metho d or dimensional analysis. This strategy is also employ ed to calculate sought
quantities using measured quantities and appropriate ma thematical relations.
Key Equations
Glossary
dimensional analysis
(also, factor-label method) versatile mathematical app roach that can be applied to computations ranging from sim ple unit
conversions to more complex, multi-step calculations involvi ng several different quantities
Fahrenheit
unit of temperature; water freezes at 32 °F and boils at 212 °F on this scale
unit conversion factor
ratio of equivalent quantities expressed with different unit s; used to convert from one unit to a different unit
Contributors and Attributions
Paul Flowers (University of North Carolina - Pembroke), Kla us Theopold (University of Delaware) and Richard Langl ey
(Stephen F. Austin State University) with contributing au thors. Textbook content produced by OpenStax College i s licensed
under a Creative Commons Attribution License 4.0 license. Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/85abf1932bd...a7ac8df6@9.110).
This page titled 9.2.6: Mathematical Treatment of Measurement Results is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by OpenStax.Example: Conversion from Fahrenheit
Exercise

0.3.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/203453SECTION OVERVIEW
0.3: Atoms, Molecules, and Ions
A general chemistry Libretexts Textbook remixed and remastered from
OpenStax's textbook:
General Chemistry
This chapter will describe some of the fundamental ch emical principles related to the composition of mat ter, including those central
to the concept of molecular identity.
9.3.1: Atomic Structure and Symbolism
9.3.2: Chemical Formulas
9.3.3: The Periodic Table
9.3.4: Molecular and Ionic Compounds
9.3.5: Chemical Nomenclature
Contributors and Attributions
Paul Flowers (University of North Carolina - Pembroke), Kla us Theopold (University of Delaware) and Richard Langl ey
(Stephen F. Austin State University) with contributing au thors. Textbook content produced by OpenStax College i s licensed
under a Creative Commons Attribution License 4.0 license. Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/85abf1932bd...a7ac8df6@9.110).
Thumbnail: Spinning Buckminsterfullerene (). (CC BY-SA 3.0; unported; Sponk).
This page titled 0.3: Atoms, Molecules, and Ions is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax.

9.3.1.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2034549.3.1: Atomic Structure and Symbolism
Write and interpret symbols that depict the atomic numb er, mass number, and charge of an atom or ion
Define the atomic mass unit and average atomic mass
Calculate average atomic mass and isotopic abundance
The development of modern atomic theory revealed mu ch about the inner structure of atoms. It was learned that an atom contains a
very small nucleus composed of positively charged p rotons and uncharged neutrons, surrounded by a much larger volume of space
containing negatively charged electrons. The nucleu s contains the majority of an atom’s mass because prot ons and neutrons are
much heavier than electrons, whereas electrons occupy almost all of an atom’s volume. The diameter of an atom is on the order of
10 m, whereas the diameter of the nucleus is roughly 10 m—about 100,000 times smaller. For a perspective ab out their
relative sizes, consider this: If the nucleus were the size of a blueberry, the atom would be about the size of a football stadium
(Figure).
Figure: If an atom could be expanded to the size of a football stadium, the nucleus would be the size of a single blueberry.
(credit middle: modification of work by “babyknight ”/Wikimedia Commons; credit right: modification of w ork by Paxson
Woelber).
Atoms—and the protons, neutrons, and electrons that compose them—are extremely small. For example, a carbo n atom weighs
less than 2 10 g, and an electron has a charge of le ss than 2 10 C (coulomb). When describing the proper ties of tiny
objects such as atoms, we use appropriately small uni ts of measure, such as the atomic mass unit (amu) and the fundamental unit of
charge (e). The amu was originally defined based on hydrogen, the lightest element, then later in terms of oxygen. Since 1961, it
has been defined with regard to the most abundant is otope of carbon, atoms of which are assigned masses of exactly 12 amu. (This
isotope is known as “carbon-12” as will be discussed later in this module.) Thus, one amu is exactly of t he mass of one
carbon-12 atom: 1 amu = 1.6605 10 g. (The Dalton (Da) and the unified atomic mass unit (u) are alternativ e units that are
equivalent to the amu.) The fundamental unit of char ge (also called the elementary charge) equals the ma gnitude of the charge of an
electron (e) with e = 1.602 10 C.
A proton has a mass of 1.0073 amu and a charge of 1+. A neutron is a slightly heavier particle with a mass 1.0087 amu and a charge
of zero; as its name suggests, it is neutral. The ele ctron has a charge of 1− and is a much lighter partic le with a mass of about
0.00055 amu (it would take about 1800 electrons to e qual the mass of one proton. The properties of thes e fundamental particles are
summarized in Table. (An observant student might no tice that the sum of an atom’s subatomic particles do es not equal the
atom’s actual mass: The total mass of six protons, six neutrons, and six electrons is 12.0993 amu, slightly l arger than the 12.00 amu
of an actual carbon-12 atom. This “missing” mass is k nown as the mass defect, and you will learn about it i n the chapter on nuclear
chemistry.)
Table: Properties of Subatomic ParticlesLearning Objectives
−10 −15
−23 −19
−24
−19

9.3.1.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/203454Name Location Charge (C) Unit Charge Mass (amu) Mass (g)
electron outside nucleus 1− 0.00055
proton nucleus 1+ 1.00727
neutron nucleus 0 0 1.00866
The number of protons in the nucleus of an atom is its atomic number (Z). This is the defining trait of an element: Its value
determines the identity of the atom. For example, any atom that contains six protons is the element carb on and has the atomic
number 6, regardless of how many neutrons or electron s it may have. A neutral atom must contain the same number of positive and
negative charges, so the number of protons equals the number of electrons. Therefore, the atomic number al so indicates the number
of electrons in an atom. The total number of proton s and neutrons in an atom is called its mass number (A). The number of
neutrons is therefore the difference between the mass num ber and the atomic number: A – Z = number of neutrons.
Atoms are electrically neutral if they contain the s ame number of positively charged protons and negative ly charged electrons.
When the numbers of these subatomic particles are not equal, the atom is electrically charged and is call ed an ion. The charge of an
atom is defined as follows:
Atomic charge = number of protons − number of electrons
As will be discussed in more detail later in this chap ter, atoms (and molecules) typically acquire charge by gaining or losing
electrons. An atom that gains one or more electrons wil l exhibit a negative charge and is called an anion. Positively charged atoms
called cations are formed when an atom loses one or mo re electrons. For example, a neutral sodium atom (Z = 11) has 11 electrons.
If this atom loses one electron, it will become a cat ion with a 1+ charge (11 − 10 = 1+). A neutral oxygen atom (Z = 8) has eight
electrons, and if it gains two electrons it will become an a nion with a 2− charge (8 − 10 = 2−).
Iodine is an essential trace element in our diet; it is needed to produce thyroid hormone. Insufficient io dine in the diet can lead
to the development of a goiter, an enlargement of the thy roid gland (Figure).
Figure: (a) Insufficient iodine in the diet can cause an enlargement of the thyroid gland called a goite r. (b) The addition
of small amounts of iodine to salt, which prevents the formation of goiters, has helped eliminate this concer n in the US where
salt consumption is high. (credit a: modification of w ork by “Almazi”/Wikimedia Commons; credit b: modific ation of work by
Mike Mozart)Example: Composition of an Atom

9.3.1.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/203454The addition of small amounts of iodine to table sal t (iodized salt) has essentially eliminated this he alth concern in the United
States, but as much as 40% of the world’s population i s still at risk of iodine deficiency. The iodine at oms are added as anions,
and each has a 1− charge and a mass number of 127. Determine the numbers of protons, neutrons, and electr ons in one of these
iodine anions.
Solution
The atomic number of iodine (53) tells us that a neut ral iodine atom contains 53 protons in its nucleus and 53 electrons outside
its nucleus. Because the sum of the numbers of proton s and neutrons equals the mass number, 127, the numb er of neutrons is
74 (127 − 53 = 74). Since the iodine is added as a 1− anion, the number of electrons is 54 [53 – (1–) = 54].
An ion of platinum has a mass number of 195 and cont ains 74 electrons. How many protons and neutrons does it contain, and
what is its charge?
Answer
78 protons; 117 neutrons; charge is 4+
Chemical Symbols
A chemical symbol is an abbreviation that we use to in dicate an element or an atom of an element. For exam ple, the symbol for
mercury is Hg (Figure). We use the same symbol to ind icate one atom of mercury (microscopic domain) or t o label a
container of many atoms of the element mercury (macrosc opic domain).
Figure: The symbol Hg represents the element mercury r egardless of the amount; it could represent one atom o f mercury or
a large amount of mercury. from Wikipedia (user: Mat erialscientist).
The symbols for several common elements and their at oms are listed in Table. Some symbols are derived f rom the common
name of the element; others are abbreviations of the name in another language. Symbols have one or two let ters, for example, H for
hydrogen and Cl for chlorine. To avoid confusion with other notations, only the first letter of a symbol is capitalized. For example,
Co is the symbol for the element cobalt, but CO is th e notation for the compound carbon monoxide, which c ontains atoms of the
elements carbon (C) and oxygen (O). All known elements and th eir symbols are in the periodic table.
Table: Some Common Elements and Their SymbolsExercise

9.3.1.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/203454Element Symbol Element Symbol
aluminum Al iron Fe (from ferrum)
bromine Br lead Pb (from plumbum)
calcium Ca magnesium Mg
carbon C mercury Hg (from hydrargyrum)
chlorine Cl nitrogen N
chromium Cr oxygen O
cobalt Co potassium K (from kalium)
copper Cu (from cuprum) silicon Si
fluorine F silver Ag (from argentum)
gold Au (from aurum) sodium Na (from natrium)
helium He sulfur S
hydrogen H tin Sn (from stannum)
iodine I zinc Zn
Traditionally, the discoverer (or discoverers) of a new element names the element. However, until the name i s recognized by the
International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC), the recommended name of the new element is based on the Latin
word(s) for its atomic number. For example, element 106 wa s called unnilhexium (Unh), element 107 was called unn ilseptium
(Uns), and element 108 was called unniloctium (Uno) for s everal years. These elements are now named after scie ntists or locations;
for example, element 106 is now known as seaborgium (Sg) in honor of Glenn Seaborg, a Nobel Prize winner who was active in
the discovery of several heavy elements.
Isotopes
The symbol for a specific isotope of any element is written by placing the mass number as a superscript to the left of the element
symbol (Figure). The atomic number is sometimes writ ten as a subscript preceding the symbol, but since th is number
defines the element’s identity, as does its symbol, i t is often omitted. For example, magnesium exists as a mixture of three isotopes,
each with an atomic number of 12 and with mass numbers of 24, 25, and 26, respectively. These isotopes can be identified as Mg,
Mg, and Mg. These isotope symbols are read as “element, mass number” and can be symbolized consistent with t his reading.
For instance, Mg is read as “magnesium 24,” and can be wr itten as “magnesium-24” or “Mg-24.” Mg is read as “mag nesium
25,” and can be written as “magnesium-25” or “Mg-25.” Al l magnesium atoms have 12 protons in their nucleus. They differ only
because a Mg atom has 12 neutrons in its nucleus, a Mg ato m has 13 neutrons, and a Mg has 14 neutrons.
Figure: The symbol for an atom indicates the element via its usual two-letter symbol, the mass number as a lef t superscript,
the atomic number as a left subscript (sometimes omitted), and the charge as a right superscript.
Information about the naturally occurring isotopes o f elements with atomic numbers 1 through 10 is given in Table. Note
that in addition to standard names and symbols, the i sotopes of hydrogen are often referred to using comm on names and
accompanying symbols. Hydrogen-2, symbolized H, is also c alled deuterium and sometimes symbolized D. Hydrogen-3,
symbolized H, is also called tritium and sometimes sym bolized T.
Table: Nuclear Compositions of Atoms of the Very Ligh t Elements24
25 26
24 25
24 25 26

9.3.1.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/203454Element Symbol Atomic NumberNumber of
ProtonsNumber of
NeutronsMass (amu)% Natural
Abundance
hydrogen(protium)1 1 0 1.0078 99.989
(deuterium)1 1 1 2.0141 0.0115
(tritium)1 1 2 3.01605 — (trace)
helium2 2 1 3.01603 0.00013
2 2 2 4.0026 100
lithium3 3 3 6.0151 7.59
3 3 4 7.0160 92.41
beryllium 4 4 5 9.0122 100
boron5 5 5 10.0129 19.9
5 5 6 11.0093 80.1
carbon6 6 6 12.0000 98.89
6 6 7 13.0034 1.11
6 6 8 14.0032 — (trace)
nitrogen7 7 7 14.0031 99.63
7 7 8 15.0001 0.37
oxygen8 8 8 15.9949 99.757
8 8 9 16.9991 0.038
8 8 10 17.9992 0.205
fluorine 9 9 10 18.9984 100
neon10 10 10 19.9924 90.48
10 10 11 20.9938 0.27
10 10 12 21.9914 9.25
Atomic Mass
Because each proton and each neutron contribute app roximately one amu to the mass of an atom, and each electron contributes far
less, the atomic mass of a single atom is approximatel y equal to its mass number (a whole number). However, t he average masses
of atoms of most elements are not whole numbers because m ost elements exist naturally as mixtures of two or more isotop es.
The mass of an element shown in a periodic table or li sted in a table of atomic masses is a weighted, average mass of all the
isotopes present in a naturally occurring sample of th at element. This is equal to the sum of each indivi dual isotope’s mass
multiplied by its fractional abundance.

9.3.1.6 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/203454For example, the element boron is composed of two isot opes: About 19.9% of all boron atoms are B with a mass of 10.0129 amu,
and the remaining 80.1% are B with a mass of 11.0093 amu. The average atomic mass for boron is calculated to be:
It is important to understand that no single boron a tom weighs exactly 10.8 amu; 10.8 amu is the average mass of all boron atoms,
and individual boron atoms weigh either approximately 10 am u or 11 amu.
A meteorite found in central Indiana contains traces of the noble gas neon picked up from the solar wind during the meteorite’s
trip through the solar system. Analysis of a sample of the gas showed that it consisted of 91.84% Ne (mass 19.9924 amu),
0.47% Ne (mass 20.9940 amu), and 7.69% Ne (mass 21.9914 amu). What is the average mass of the neon in the sola r
wind?
Solution
The average mass of a neon atom in the solar wind is 2 0.15 amu. (The average mass of a terrestrial neon atom is 20.1796 amu.
This result demonstrates that we may find slight differe nces in the natural abundance of isotopes, depending o n their origin.)
A sample of magnesium is found to contain 78.70% of Mg atoms (mass 23.98 amu), 10.13% of Mg atoms (mass 2 4.99
amu), and 11.17% of Mg atoms (mass 25.98 amu). Calculate the average mass of a Mg atom.
Answer
24.31 amu
We can also do variations of this type of calculation, a s shown in the next example.
Naturally occurring chlorine consists of Cl (mass 34.96 885 amu) and Cl (mass 36.96590 amu), with an average mass of
35.453 amu. What is the percent composition of Cl in terms of these two isotopes?
Solution
The average mass of chlorine is the fraction that is Cl times the mass of Cl plus the fraction that is C l times the mass of
Cl.
If we let x represent the fraction that is Cl, then the fraction th at is Cl is represented by 1.00 − x.
(The fraction that is Cl + the fraction that is Cl m ust add up to 1, so the fraction of Cl must equal 1.0 0 − the fraction of
Cl.)
Substituting this into the average mass equation, we have:10
Example: Calculation of Average Atomic Mass
21 22
Exercise
24 25
Example: Calculation of Percent Abundance
35 37
35 35 37
35 37
35 37 37

9.3.1.7 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/203454So solving yields: x = 0.7576, which means that 1.00 − 0.7576 = 0.2424. Th erefore, chlorine consists of 75.76% Cl and
24.24% Cl.
Naturally occurring copper consists of Cu (mass 62.9 296 amu) and Cu (mass 64.9278 amu), with an average mass of
63.546 amu. What is the percent composition of Cu in terms of these two isotopes?
Answer
69.15% Cu-63 and 30.85% Cu-65
Figure: Analysis of zirconium in a mass spectrometer pro duces a mass spectrum with peaks showing the different iso topes
of Zr.
The occurrence and natural abundances of isotopes can be experimentally determined using an instrument ca lled a mass
spectrometer. Mass spectrometry (MS) is widely used in ch emistry, forensics, medicine, environmental science, an d many other
fields to analyze and help identify the substances in a sample of material. In a typical mass spectromete r (Figure), the sample
is vaporized and exposed to a high-energy electron b eam that causes the sample’s atoms (or molecules) t o become electrically
charged, typically by losing one or more electrons. The se cations then pass through a (variable) electric or magnetic field that
deflects each cation’s path to an extent that depend s on both its mass and charge (similar to how the pa th of a large steel ball
bearing rolling past a magnet is deflected to a less er extent that that of a small steel BB). The ions a re detected, and a plot of the
relative number of ions generated versus their mass-t o-charge ratios (a mass spectrum) is made. The height of each vertical feature
or peak in a mass spectrum is proportional to the fr action of cations with the specified mass-to-charge r atio. Since its initial use
during the development of modern atomic theory, MS has evolved to become a powerful tool for chemical anal ysis in a wide range
of applications.35
Exercise
63 65
Mass Spectrometry MSMass Spectrometry MS

9.3.1.8 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/203454Video: Watch this video from the Royal Society for Chemistry for a brief description of the rudiments of mass spectrometry.
Summary
An atom consists of a small, positively charged nucleus s urrounded by electrons. The nucleus contains protons and neutrons; its
diameter is about 100,000 times smaller than that of the atom. The mass of one atom is usually expressed i n atomic mass units
(amu), which is referred to as the atomic mass. An am u is defined as exactly of the mass of a carbon-12 a tom and is equal to
1.6605 10 g.
Protons are relatively heavy particles with a charge o f 1+ and a mass of 1.0073 amu. Neutrons are relatively heavy particles with no
charge and a mass of 1.0087 amu. Electrons are light pa rticles with a charge of 1− and a mass of 0.00055 amu. The number of
protons in the nucleus is called the atomic number (Z) and is the property that defines an atom’s elementa l identity. The sum of the
numbers of protons and neutrons in the nucleus is cal led the mass number and, expressed in amu, is approxi mately equal to the
mass of the atom. An atom is neutral when it contains equal numbers of electrons and protons.
Isotopes of an element are atoms with the same atomic number but different mass numbers; isotopes of an el ement, therefore, differ
from each other only in the number of neutrons withi n the nucleus. When a naturally occurring element is composed of several
isotopes, the atomic mass of the element represents the average of the masses of the isotopes involved. A che mical symbol
identifies the atoms in a substance using symbols, which ar e one-, two-, or three-letter abbreviations for the atoms.
Key Equations
Glossary
anion
negatively charged atom or molecule (contains more elec trons than protons)
atomic mass
average mass of atoms of an element, expressed in amu
atomic mass unit (amu)
(also, unified atomic mass unit, u, or Dalton, Da) unit of mass equal to of the mass of a C atom
atomic number (Z)
number of protons in the nucleus of an atom
cation
positively charged atom or molecule (contains fewer elect rons than protons)
chemical symbol
one-, two-, or three-letter abbreviation used to represent an element or its atoms
Dalton (Da)
alternative unit equivalent to the atomic mass unit
fundamental unit of charge
(also called the elementary charge) equals the magnitu de of the charge of an electron (e) with e = 1.602 10 C
ion
electrically charged atom or molecule (contains unequal numbers of protons and electrons)
mass number (A)
sum of the numbers of neutrons and protons in the nucleus of an atom
unified atomic mass unit (u)−24
−19

9.3.1.9 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/203454alternative unit equivalent to the atomic mass unit
Contributors and Attributions
Paul Flowers (University of North Carolina - Pembroke), Kla us Theopold (University of Delaware) and Richard Langl ey
(Stephen F. Austin State University) with contributing au thors. Textbook content produced by OpenStax College i s licensed
under a Creative Commons Attribution License 4.0 license. Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/85abf1932bd...a7ac8df6@9.110).

This page titled 9.3.1: Atomic Structure and Symbolism is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax.

9.3.2.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2034559.3.2: Chemical Formulas
Symbolize the composition of molecules using molecular form ulas and empirical formulas
Represent the bonding arrangement of atoms within molecules using structural formulas
A molecular formula is a representation of a molecul e that uses chemical symbols to indicate the types o f atoms followed by
subscripts to show the number of atoms of each type in the molecule. (A subscript is used only when more th an one atom of a given
type is present.) Molecular formulas are also used as abbrevia tions for the names of compounds.
The structural formula for a compound gives the same information as its molecular formula (the types an d numbers of atoms in the
molecule) but also shows how the atoms are connected in the molecule. The structural formula for methane co ntains symbols for
one C atom and four H atoms, indicating the number o f atoms in the molecule (Figure). The lines represent bonds that hold
the atoms together. (A chemical bond is an attractio n between atoms or ions that holds them together in a molecule or a crystal.) We
will discuss chemical bonds and see how to predict the a rrangement of atoms in a molecule later. For now, si mply know that the
lines are an indication of how the atoms are connect ed in a molecule. A ball-and-stick model shows the geo metric arrangement of
the atoms with atomic sizes not to scale, and a space-fi lling model shows the relative sizes of the atoms.
Figure: A methane molecule can be represented as (a) a molecular formula, (b) a structural formula, (c) a ball-and-stick
model, and (d) a space-filling model. Carbon and hyd rogen atoms are represented by black and white spheres, respectively.
Although many elements consist of discrete, individua l atoms, some exist as molecules made up of two or mo re atoms of the
element chemically bonded together. For example, most samples of the elements hydrogen, oxygen, and nitrog en are composed of
molecules that contain two atoms each (called diatom ic molecules) and thus have the molecular formulas H, O, and N,
respectively. Other elements commonly found as diatom ic molecules are fluorine (F), chlorine (Cl), bromin e (Br), and iodine
(I). The most common form of the element sulfur is c omposed of molecules that consist of eight atoms of su lfur; its molecular
formula is S (Figure).
Figure: A molecule of sulfur is composed of eight sulfu r atoms and is therefore written as S. It can be repre sented as (a) a
structural formula, (b) a ball-and-stick model, and (c) a space-filling model. Sulfur atoms are represented by yellow spheres.
It is important to note that a subscript following a s ymbol and a number in front of a symbol do not repre sent the same thing; for
example, H and 2H represent distinctly different spe cies. H is a molecular formula; it represents a diatom ic molecule of
hydrogen, consisting of two atoms of the element that a re chemically bonded together. The expression 2H, on t he other hand,
indicates two separate hydrogen atoms that are not com bined as a unit. The expression 2H represents two mole cules of diatomic
hydrogen (Figure).Learning Objectives
2 2 2
2 2 2
2 2

9.3.2.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/203455
Figure: The symbols H, 2H, H, and 2H represent very di fferent entities.
Compounds are formed when two or more elements chemica lly combine, resulting in the formation of bonds. For e xample,
hydrogen and oxygen can react to form water, and sodi um and chlorine can react to form table salt. We som etimes describe the
composition of these compounds with an empirical formu la, which indicates the types of atoms present and the simplest wholenumber ratio of the number of atoms (or ions) in the compo und. For example, titanium dioxide (used as pigment in whit e paint and
in the thick, white, blocking type of sunscreen) has a n empirical formula of TiO. This identifies the elem ents titanium (Ti) and
oxygen (O) as the constituents of titanium dioxide, a nd indicates the presence of twice as many atoms of th e element oxygen as
atoms of the element titanium (Figure).
Figure: (a) The white compound titanium dioxide pro vides effective protection from the sun. (b) A crystal of titanium
dioxide, TiO, contains titanium and oxygen in a rati o of 1 to 2. The titanium atoms are gray and the oxy gen atoms are red. (credit
a: modification of work by “osseous”/Flickr).
As discussed previously, we can describe a compound with a molecular formula, in which the subscripts indicat e the actual
numbers of atoms of each element in a molecule of the compound. In many cases, the molecular formula of a substance is de rived
from experimental determination of both its empirica l formula and its molecular mass (the sum of atomic masses for all atoms
composing the molecule). For example, it can be determ ined experimentally that benzene contains two elemen ts, carbon (C) and
hydrogen (H), and that for every carbon atom in benz ene, there is one hydrogen atom. Thus, the empirical formula is CH. An
experimental determination of the molecular mass rev eals that a molecule of benzene contains six carbon atoms and six hydrogen
atoms, so the molecular formula for benzene is C H (Figure).
Figure: Benzene, C H, is produced during oil refining and has many industrial uses. A benzene molecule can b e represented
as (a) a structural formula, (b) a ball-and-stick mode l, and (c) a space-filling model. (d) Benzene is a cl ear liquid. (credit d:
modification of work by Sahar Atwa).
If we know a compound’s formula, we can easily determin e the empirical formula. (This is somewhat of an acade mic exercise; the
reverse chronology is generally followed in actual pr actice.) For example, the molecular formula for acetic acid, the component
that gives vinegar its sharp taste, is C H O. This formu la indicates that a molecule of acetic acid (Figure) contains two
carbon atoms, four hydrogen atoms, and two oxygen ato ms. The ratio of atoms is 2:4:2. Dividing by the lowest common2 2
6 6
6 6
2 4 2

9.3.2.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/203455denominator (2) gives the simplest, whole-number rati o of atoms, 1:2:1, so the empirical formula is CH O. Not e that a molecular
formula is always a whole-number multiple of an empirical formula.
Figure: (a) Vinegar contains acetic acid, C H O, which has an empirical formula of CH O. It can be represent ed as (b) a
structural formula and (c) as a ball-and-stick model. (credit a: modification of work by “HomeSpot HQ”/Flic kr)
Molecules of glucose (blood sugar) contain 6 carbon a toms, 12 hydrogen atoms, and 6 oxygen atoms. What are the molecular
and empirical formulas of glucose?
Solution
The molecular formula is C H O because one molecule a ctually contains 6 C, 12 H, and 6 O atoms. The simples t wholenumber ratio of C to H to O atoms in glucose is 1:2:1, so the emp irical formula is CH O.
A molecule of metaldehyde (a pesticide used for sna ils and slugs) contains 8 carbon atoms, 16 hydrogen at oms, and 4 oxygen
atoms. What are the molecular and empirical formulas of metaldehyde?
Answer
Molecular formula, C H O; empirical formula, C H O
It is important to be aware that it may be possible f or the same atoms to be arranged in different ways: Co mpounds with the same
molecular formula may have different atom-to-atom b onding and therefore different structures. For examp le, could there be another
compound with the same formula as acetic acid, C H O? And if so, what would be the structure of its molecules?
If you predict that another compound with the formul a C H O could exist, then you demonstrated good chemic al insight and are
correct. Two C atoms, four H atoms, and two O atoms can also be arranged to form methyl formate, which is used in
manufacturing, as an insecticide, and for quick-drying finishes. Methyl formate molecules have one of the ox ygen atoms between
the two carbon atoms, differing from the arrangement in acetic acid molecules. Acetic acid and methyl for mate are examples of
isomers—compounds with the same chemical formula but different molecular structures (Figure). Note that th is small
difference in the arrangement of the atoms has a majo r effect on their respective chemical properties. You would certainly not want
to use a solution of methyl formate as a substitute for a solution of acetic acid (vinegar) when you make salad dressing.
Figure: Molecules of (a) acetic acid and methyl form ate (b) are structural isomers; they have the same form ula (C H O) but
different structures (and therefore different chemica l properties).2
2 4 2 2
Example: Empirical and Molecular Formulas
6 12 6
Exercise
8 16 4 2 4
2 4 2
2 4 2
2 4 2

9.3.2.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/203455Many types of isomers exist (Figure). Acetic acid and methyl formate are structural isomers, compounds in which the
molecules differ in how the atoms are connected to ea ch other. There are also various types of spatial iso mers, in which the relative
orientations of the atoms in space can be different. For example, the compound carvone (found in caraway se eds, spearmint, and
mandarin orange peels) consists of two isomers that are mirror images of each other. S-(+)-carvone smells like caraway, and R-(−)carvone smells like spearmint.
Figure: Molecules of carvone are spatial isomers; they only differ in the relative orientations of the atom s in space. (credit
bottom left: modification of work by “Miansari66”/Wi kimedia Commons; credit bottom right: modification o f work by Forest &
Kim Starr)
Contributors and Attributions
Summary
A molecular formula uses chemical symbols and subscrip ts to indicate the exact numbers of different atoms in a molecule or
compound. An empirical formula gives the simplest, whol e-number ratio of atoms in a compound. A structural formula indicates
the bonding arrangement of the atoms in the molecule. Ball-and-stick and space-filling models show the geom etric arrangement of
atoms in a molecule. Isomers are compounds with the same mole cular formula but different arrangements of atoms.
Glossary
empirical formula
formula showing the composition of a compound given as the simplest whole-number ratio of atoms
isomers
compounds with the same chemical formula but different st ructures
molecular formula
formula indicating the composition of a molecule of a co mpound and giving the actual number of atoms of each elem ent in a
molecule of the compound.
spatial isomers
compounds in which the relative orientations of the atoms i n space differ

9.3.2.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/203455structural isomer
one of two substances that have the same molecular formula but different physical and chemical properties because t heir atoms
are bonded differently
structural formula
shows the atoms in a molecule and how they are connected
Contributors and Attributions
Paul Flowers (University of North Carolina - Pembroke), Kla us Theopold (University of Delaware) and Richard Langl ey
(Stephen F. Austin State University) with contributing au thors. Textbook content produced by OpenStax College i s licensed
under a Creative Commons Attribution License 4.0 license. Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/85abf1932bd...a7ac8df6@9.110).
This page titled 9.3.2: Chemical Formulas is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax.

9.3.3.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2034569.3.3: The Periodic Table
State the periodic law and explain the organization of elem ents in the periodic table
Predict the general properties of elements based on their location within the periodic table
Identify metals, nonmetals, and metalloids by their proper ties and/or location on the periodic table
As early chemists worked to purify ores and discovered more elements, they realized that various elements co uld be grouped
together by their similar chemical behaviors. One suc h grouping includes lithium (Li), sodium (Na), and po tassium (K): These
elements all are shiny, conduct heat and electricity well, and have similar chemical properties. A second grouping includes calcium
(Ca), strontium (Sr), and barium (Ba), which also are shin y, good conductors of heat and electricity, and have chemical properties
in common. However, the specific properties of these t wo groupings are notably different from each other. For example: Li, Na,
and K are much more reactive than are Ca, Sr, and Ba; Li, Na, and K form compounds with oxygen in a ratio of t wo of their atoms
to one oxygen atom, whereas Ca, Sr, and Ba form compou nds with one of their atoms to one oxygen atom. Fluorine (F), chlorine
(Cl), bromine (Br), and iodine (I) also exhibit simil ar properties to each other, but these properties a re drastically different from
those of any of the elements above.
Dimitri Mendeleev in Russia (1869) and Lothar Meyer in Germany (1870) independently recognized that there wa s a periodic
relationship among the properties of the elements kn own at that time. Both published tables with the eleme nts arranged according
to increasing atomic mass. But Mendeleev went one ste p further than Meyer: He used his table to predict the existence of elements
that would have the properties similar to aluminum an d silicon, but were yet unknown. The discoveries of gal lium (1875) and
germanium (1886) provided great support for Mendelee v’s work. Although Mendeleev and Meyer had a long disp ute over priority,
Mendeleev’s contributions to the development of the perio dic table are now more widely recognized (Figure).
Figure: (a) Dimitri Mendeleev is widely credited wit h creating (b) the first periodic table of the eleme nts. (credit a:
modification of work by Serge Lachinov; credit b: m odification of work by “Den fjättrade ankan”/Wikime dia Commons)
By the twentieth century, it became apparent that the periodic relationship involved atomic numbers rathe r than atomic masses. The
modern statement of this relationship, the periodic law, is as follows: the properties of the elements are periodic functions o f their
atomic numbers. A modern periodic table arranges the elements in i ncreasing order of their atomic numbers and groups atoms with
similar properties in the same vertical column (Figur e). Each box represents an element and contains its atomic number,
symbol, average atomic mass, and (sometimes) name. Th e elements are arranged in seven horizontal rows, called periods or series,
and 18 vertical columns, called groups. Groups are labe led at the top of each column. In the United States, t he labels traditionally
were numerals with capital letters. However, IUPAC recommend s that the numbers 1 through 18 be used, and these lab els are more
common. For the table to fit on a single page, parts of two of the rows, a total of 14 columns, are usually written below the main
body of the table.Learning Objectives

9.3.3.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/203456
Figure: Elements in the periodic table are organized according to their properties.
Many elements differ dramatically in their chemical a nd physical properties, but some elements are similar in their behaviors. For
example, many elements appear shiny, are malleable (able to be deformed without breaking) and ductile (c an be drawn into wires),
and conduct heat and electricity well. Other elements are not shiny, malleable, or ductile, and are poor con ductors of heat and
electricity. We can sort the elements into large classe s with common properties: metals (elements that are s hiny, malleable, good
conductors of heat and electricity—shaded yellow); n onmetals (elements that appear dull, poor conductor s of heat and electricity—
shaded green); and metalloids (elements that conduc t heat and electricity moderately well, and possess so me properties of metals
and some properties of nonmetals—shaded purple).
The elements can also be classified into the main-g roup elements (or representative elements) in the co lumns labeled 1, 2, and 13–
18; the transition metals in the columns labeled 3–1 2; and inner transition metals in the two rows at the bottom of the table (the toprow elements are called lanthanides and the bottom-r ow elements are actinides; Figure). The elements can b e subdivided
further by more specific properties, such as the composit ion of the compounds they form. For example, the elements i n group 1 (the
first column) form compounds that consist of one at om of the element and one atom of hydrogen. These el ements (except
hydrogen) are known as alkali metals, and they all ha ve similar chemical properties. The elements in gro up 2 (the second column)
form compounds consisting of one atom of the elemen t and two atoms of hydrogen: These are called alkali ne earth metals, with
similar properties among members of that group. Other groups with specific names are the pnictogens (group 15), chalcogens
(group 16), halogens (group 17), and the noble gases (group 18, also known as inert gases). The groups can also be referred to by
the first element of the group: For example, the cha lcogens can be called the oxygen group or oxygen fam ily. Hydrogen is a unique,
nonmetallic element with properties similar to both group 1 and group 17 elements. For that reason, hydr ogen may be shown at the
top of both groups, or by itself.

9.3.3.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/203456
Figure: The periodic table organizes elements with sim ilar properties into groups.
Atoms of each of the following elements are essential for l ife. Give the group name for the following elements:
a. chlorine
b. calcium
c. sodium
d. sulfur
Solution
The family names are as follows:
a. halogen
b. alkaline earth metal
c. alkali metal
d. chalcogen
Give the group name for each of the following elements:
a. krypton
b. selenium
c. barium
d. lithium
Answer a
noble gas
Answer b
chalcogen
Answer cExample: Naming Groups of Elements
Exercise

9.3.3.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/203456alkaline earth metal
Answer d
alkali metal
In studying the periodic table, you might have noti ced something about the atomic masses of some of the elements. Element 43
(technetium), element 61 (promethium), and most of th e elements with atomic number 84 (polonium) and high er have their atomic
mass given in square brackets. This is done for eleme nts that consist entirely of unstable, radioactive i sotopes (you will learn more
about radioactivity in the nuclear chemistry chapte r). An average atomic weight cannot be determined for these elements because
their radioisotopes may vary significantly in relat ive abundance, depending on the source, or may not eve n exist in nature. The
number in square brackets is the atomic mass number (and approximate atomic mass) of the most stable isotope of that element.
Contributors and Attributions
Summary
The discovery of the periodic recurrence of similar properties among the elements led to the formulation of the periodic table, in
which the elements are arranged in order of increasin g atomic number in rows known as periods and columns kno wn as groups.
Elements in the same group of the periodic table hav e similar chemical properties. Elements can be classif ied as metals, metalloids,
and nonmetals, or as a main-group elements, transition metals, and inner transition metals. Groups are numbe red 1–18 from left to
right. The elements in group 1 are known as the alkal i metals; those in group 2 are the alkaline earth me tals; those in 15 are the
pnictogens; those in 16 are the chalcogens; those in 17 ar e the halogens; and those in 18 are the noble gases.
Glossary
actinide
inner transition metal in the bottom of the bottom two rows of the periodic table
alkali metal
element in group 1
alkaline earth metal
element in group 2
chalcogen
element in group 16
group
vertical column of the periodic table
halogen
element in group 17
inert gas
(also, noble gas) element in group 18
inner transition metal
(also, lanthanide or actinide) element in the bottom two ro ws; if in the first row, also called lanthanide, or if in th e second row,
also called actinide
lanthanide
inner transition metal in the top of the bottom two rows o f the periodic table
main-group element

9.3.3.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/203456(also, representative element) element in columns 1, 2, an d 12–18
metal
element that is shiny, malleable, good conductor of heat a nd electricity
metalloid
element that conducts heat and electricity moderately well, and possesses some properties of metals and some proper ties of
nonmetals
noble gas
(also, inert gas) element in group 18
nonmetal
element that appears dull, poor conductor of heat and e lectricity
period
(also, series) horizontal row of the periodic table
periodic law
properties of the elements are periodic function of thei r atomic numbers.
periodic table
table of the elements that places elements with similar ch emical properties close together
pnictogen
element in group 15
representative element
(also, main-group element) element in columns 1, 2, and 12 –18
transition metal
element in columns 3–11
series
(also, period) horizontal row of the period table
Contributors and Attributions
Paul Flowers (University of North Carolina - Pembroke), Kla us Theopold (University of Delaware) and Richard Langl ey
(Stephen F. Austin State University) with contributing au thors. Textbook content produced by OpenStax College i s licensed
under a Creative Commons Attribution License 4.0 license. Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/85abf1932bd...a7ac8df6@9.110).
This page titled 9.3.3: The Periodic Table is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax.

9.3.4.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2034579.3.4: Molecular and Ionic Compounds
Define ionic and molecular (covalent) compounds
Predict the type of compound formed from elements based on th eir location within the periodic table
Determine formulas for simple ionic compounds
In ordinary chemical reactions, the nucleus of each a tom (and thus the identity of the element) remains u nchanged. Electrons,
however, can be added to atoms by transfer from other atoms, lost by transfer to other atoms, or shared wit h other atoms. The
transfer and sharing of electrons among atoms govern th e chemistry of the elements. During the formation of some compounds,
atoms gain or lose electrons, and form electrically charg ed particles called ions (Figure).
Figure: (a) A sodium atom (Na) has equal numbers of pr otons and electrons (11) and is uncharged. (b) A sodium cation
(Na) has lost an electron, so it has one more proton (1 1) than electrons (10), giving it an overall positive charge, signified by a
superscripted plus sign.
You can use the periodic table to predict whether an atom will form an anion or a cation, and you can oft en predict the charge of the
resulting ion. Atoms of many main-group metals lose e nough electrons to leave them with the same number of electrons as an atom
of the preceding noble gas. To illustrate, an atom o f an alkali metal (group 1) loses one electron and fo rms a cation with a 1+
charge; an alkaline earth metal (group 2) loses two electrons and forms a cation with a 2+ charge, and so on. For example, a neutral
calcium atom, with 20 protons and 20 electrons, readily loses two electrons. This results in a cation with 20 protons, 18 electrons,
and a 2+ charge. It has the same number of electron s as atoms of the preceding noble gas, argon, and is sy mbolized Ca. The name
of a metal ion is the same as the name of the metal atom f rom which it forms, so Ca is called a calcium ion.
When atoms of nonmetal elements form ions, they generally gain enough electrons to give them the same number of ele ctrons as an
atom of the next noble gas in the periodic table. Ato ms of group 17 gain one electron and form anions wit h a 1− charge; atoms of
group 16 gain two electrons and form ions with a 2− cha rge, and so on. For example, the neutral bromine atom, with 35 protons
and 35 electrons, can gain one electron to provide it with 36 electrons. This results in an anion with 35 pr otons, 36 electrons, and a
1− charge. It has the same number of electrons as a toms of the next noble gas, krypton, and is symboliz ed Br. (A discussion of the
theory supporting the favored status of noble gas e lectron numbers reflected in these predictive rules f or ion formation is provided
in a later chapter of this text.)
Note the usefulness of the periodic table in predicti ng likely ion formation and charge (Figure). Moving from the far left to
the right on the periodic table, main-group elements tend to form cations with a charge equal to the grou p number. That is, group 1
elements form 1+ ions; group 2 elements form 2+ ions, and so on. Moving from the far right to the left on the periodic table,
elements often form anions with a negative charge eq ual to the number of groups moved left from the nob le gases. For example,
group 17 elements (one group left of the noble gases) form 1− ions; group 16 elements (two groups left) for m 2− ions, and so on.
This trend can be used as a guide in many cases, but it s predictive value decreases when moving toward the c enter of the periodic
table. In fact, transition metals and some other meta ls often exhibit variable charges that are not predic table by their location in the
table. For example, copper can form ions with a 1+ or 2+ charge, and iron can form ions with a 2+ or 3+ charge.Learning Objectives
2+
2+

9.3.4.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/203457
Figure: Some elements exhibit a regular pattern of ion ic charge when they form ions.
An ion found in some compounds used as antiperspirants contains 13 protons and 10 electrons. What is its symbol?
Solution
Because the number of protons remains unchanged when an atom forms an ion, the atomic number of the elemen t must be 13.
Knowing this lets us use the periodic table to identify the element as Al (aluminum). The Al atom has lost thr ee electrons and
thus has three more positive charges (13) than it has ele ctrons (10). This is the aluminum cation, Al.
Give the symbol and name for the ion with 34 protons and 36 el ectrons.
Answer
Se, the selenide ion
Magnesium and nitrogen react to form an ionic compou nd. Predict which forms an anion, which forms a cation, and the
charges of each ion. Write the symbol for each ion and nam e them.
Solution
Magnesium’s position in the periodic table (group 2) tells us that it is a metal. Metals form positive ions (cations). A
magnesium atom must lose two electrons to have the s ame number electrons as an atom of the previous noble gas, neon. Thus,
a magnesium atom will form a cation with two fewer elect rons than protons and a charge of 2+. The symbol for the ion is
Mg, and it is called a magnesium ion.
Nitrogen’s position in the periodic table (group 15) reveals that it is a nonmetal. Nonmetals form negati ve ions (anions). A
nitrogen atom must gain three electrons to have the same number of electrons as an atom of the following noble gas, neon.
Thus, a nitrogen atom will form an anion with three mo re electrons than protons and a charge of 3−. The sy mbol for the ion is
N, and it is called a nitride ion.Example: Composition of Ions
3+
Exercise
2−
Example: Formation of Ions
2+
3−

9.3.4.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/203457Aluminum and carbon react to form an ionic compound. Predict which forms an anion, which forms a cation, an d the charges
of each ion. Write the symbol for each ion and name them.
Answer
Al will form a cation with a charge of 3+: Al, an alumi num ion. Carbon will form an anion with a charge of 4 −: C, a
carbide ion.
The ions that we have discussed so far are called mona tomic ions, that is, they are ions formed from only one atom. We also find
many polyatomic ions. These ions, which act as discrete units, are electrically charged molecules (a group of bonded atoms with an
overall charge). Some of the more important polyatom ic ions are listed in Table. Oxyanions are polyatomi c ions that contain
one or more oxygen atoms. At this point in your study of chemistry, you should memorize the names, formula s, and charges of the
most common polyatomic ions. Because you will use them r epeatedly, they will soon become familiar.
Table: Common Polyatomic IonsExercise
3+ 4−

9.3.4.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/203457Name Formula Related Acid Formula
ammonium
hydronium
oxide
peroxide
hydroxide
acetate acetic acid
cyanide hydrocyanic acid
azide hydrazoic acid
carbonate carbonic acid
bicarbonate
nitrate nitric acid
nitrite nitrous acid
sulfate sulfuric acid
hydrogen sulfate
sulfite sulfurous acid
hydrogen sulfite
phosphate phosphoric acid
hydrogen phosphate
dihydrogen phosphate
perchlorate perchloric acid
chlorate chloric acid
chlorite chlorous acid
hypochlorite hypochlorous acid
chromate chromic acid
dichromate dichromic acid
permanganate permanganic acid
Note that there is a system for naming some polyatomic ions; -ate and -ite are suffixes designating polyatomic ions containing
more or fewer oxygen atoms. Per- (short for “hyper”) and hypo- (meaning “under”) are prefixes meaning more oxygen atoms than
-ate and fewer oxygen atoms than -ite, respectively. For example, perchlorate is, chlorate is, chlorite is and
hypochlorite is ClO. Unfortunately, the number of oxy gen atoms corresponding to a given suffix or prefix is not consistent; for
example, nitrate is while sulfate is. This will be covered in more detail in the next module on nomenclature.
The nature of the attractive forces that hold atoms or ions together within a compound is the basis for c lassifying chemical bonding.
When electrons are transferred and ions form, ionic bonds result. Ionic bonds are electrostatic forces of attraction, that is, the
attractive forces experienced between objects of opp osite electrical charge (in this case, cations and an ions). When electrons are
“shared” and molecules form, covalent bonds result. Co valent bonds are the attractive forces between the po sitively charged nuclei−

9.3.4.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/203457of the bonded atoms and one or more pairs of electr ons that are located between the atoms. Compounds are classified as ionic or
molecular (covalent) on the basis of the bonds present in them.
Ionic Compounds
When an element composed of atoms that readily lose electrons (a metal) reacts with an element composed of atoms that readily
gain electrons (a nonmetal), a transfer of electron s usually occurs, producing ions. The compound form ed by this transfer is
stabilized by the electrostatic attractions (ionic bonds) between the ions of opposite charge present in the compound. For example,
when each sodium atom in a sample of sodium metal (gro up 1) gives up one electron to form a sodium cation, Na, and each
chlorine atom in a sample of chlorine gas (group 17) accepts one electron to form a chloride anion, Cl, the resulting compound,
NaCl, is composed of sodium ions and chloride ions in t he ratio of one Na ion for each Cl ion. Similarly, eac h calcium atom
(group 2) can give up two electrons and transfer one to each of two chlorine atoms to form CaCl, which is composed of Ca and
Cl ions in the ratio of one Ca ion to two Cl ions.
A compound that contains ions and is held together by ionic bonds is called an ionic compound. The perio dic table can help us
recognize many of the compounds that are ionic: When a metal is combined with one or more nonmetals, the c ompound is usually
ionic. This guideline works well for predicting ionic c ompound formation for most of the compounds typically encountered in an
introductory chemistry course. However, it is not always true (for example, aluminum chloride, AlCl, is not ionic).
You can often recognize ionic compounds because of their properties. Ionic compounds are solids that typ ically melt at high
temperatures and boil at even higher temperatures. For example, sodium chloride melts at 801 °C and boi ls at 1413 °C. (As a
comparison, the molecular compound water melts at 0 ° C and boils at 100 °C.) In solid form, an ionic compo und is not electrically
conductive because its ions are unable to flow (“electr icity” is the flow of charged particles). When molten, however, it can conduct
electricity because its ions are able to move freely thr ough the liquid (Figure).
Figure: Sodium chloride melts at 801 °C and conducts electricity when molten. (credit: modification of w ork by Mark
Blaser and Matt Evans)
In every ionic compound, the total number of positiv e charges of the cations equals the total number of n egative charges of the
anions. Thus, ionic compounds are electrically neutral overall, even though they contain positive and nega tive ions. We can use this
observation to help us write the formula of an ionic compound. The formula of an ionic compound must ha ve a ratio of ions such
that the numbers of positive and negative charges are equ al.
The gemstone sapphire (Figure) is mostly a compound o f aluminum and oxygen that contains aluminum cations, Al,
and oxygen anions, O. What is the formula of this compou nd?+
22+
− 2+ −
Example: Predicting the Formula of an Ionic Compound
3+
2−

9.3.4.6 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/203457
Figure: Although pure aluminum oxide is colorless, tra ce amounts of iron and titanium give blue sapphire it s
characteristic color. (credit: modification of work by Stanislav Doronenko)
Solution Because the ionic compound must be electrica lly neutral, it must have the same number of positi ve and negative
charges. Two aluminum ions, each with a charge of 3+, would give us six positive charges, and three oxide ions, each with a
charge of 2−, would give us six negative charges. The for mula would be Al O.
Predict the formula of the ionic compound formed between the sodium cation, Na, and the sulfide anion, S.
Answer
Na S
Many ionic compounds contain polyatomic ions (Table) as the cation, the anion, or both. As with simple ion ic compounds,
these compounds must also be electrically neutral, so their formulas can be predicted by treating the pol yatomic ions as discrete
units. We use parentheses in a formula to indicate a group of atoms that behave as a unit. For example, the formula for calcium
phosphate, one of the minerals in our bones, is Ca (PO). This formula indicates that there are three calci um ions (Ca) for every
two phosphate groups. The groups are discrete unit s, each consisting of one phosphorus atom and four oxygen
atoms, and having an overall charge of 3−. The comp ound is electrically neutral, and its formula shows a total count of three Ca,
two P, and eight O atoms.
Baking powder contains calcium dihydrogen phosphate, an ionic compound composed of the ions Ca and. What i s
the formula of this compound?
Solution
The positive and negative charges must balance, and t his ionic compound must be electrically neutral. Th us, we must have two
negative charges to balance the 2+ charge of the ca lcium ion. This requires a ratio of one Ca ion to two ions. We
designate this by enclosing the formula for the dihy drogen phosphate ion in parentheses and adding a subsc ript 2. The formula
is Ca(H PO).
Predict the formula of the ionic compound formed bet ween the lithium ion and the peroxide ion, (Hint: Use the periodic
table to predict the sign and the charge on the lithium io n.)
Answer
Li O
Because an ionic compound is not made up of single, discrete molecules, it may not be properly symboliz ed using a molecular
formula. Instead, ionic compounds must be symbolized b y a formula indicating the relative numbers of its constituent ions. For
compounds containing only monatomic ions (such as NaCl) and for many compounds containing polyatomic ions (such as CaSO),
these formulas are just the empirical formulas introd uced earlier in this chapter. However, the formulas fo r some ionic compounds
containing polyatomic ions are not empirical formula s. For example, the ionic compound sodium oxalate is comprised of Na and2 3
Exercise
+ 2−
3 4 22+
Example: Predicting the Formula of a Compound with a Polyatomic Anion
2+
2+
2 4 2
Exercise
2 2

9.3.4.7 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/203457 ions combined in a 2:1 ratio, and its formula is writ ten as Na C O. The subscripts in this formula are not th e smallestpossible whole numbers, as each can be divided by 2 to y ield the empirical formula, NaCO. This is not the acc epted formula for
sodium oxalate, however, as it does not accurately repres ent the compound’s polyatomic anion,.
Molecular Compounds
Many compounds do not contain ions but instead consis t solely of discrete, neutral molecules. These molecul ar compounds
(covalent compounds) result when atoms share, rather t han transfer (gain or lose), electrons. Covalent bondi ng is an important and
extensive concept in chemistry, and it will be treate d in considerable detail in a later chapter of this t ext. We can often identify
molecular compounds on the basis of their physical properties. Under normal conditions, molecular compoun ds often exist as
gases, low-boiling liquids, and low-melting solids, althou gh many important exceptions exist.
Whereas ionic compounds are usually formed when a me tal and a nonmetal combine, covalent compounds are usually formed by a
combination of nonmetals. Thus, the periodic table c an help us recognize many of the compounds that are covalent. While we can
use the positions of a compound’s elements in the p eriodic table to predict whether it is ionic or coval ent at this point in our study
of chemistry, you should be aware that this is a very simplistic approach that does not account for a numb er of interesting
exceptions. Shades of gray exist between ionic and molecular compounds, and you’ll learn more about those later.
Predict whether the following compounds are ionic or mole cular:
a. KI, the compound used as a source of iodine in table salt
b. H O, the bleach and disinfectant hydrogen peroxide
c. CHCl, the anesthetic chloroform
d. Li CO, a source of lithium in antidepressants
Solution
a. Potassium (group 1) is a metal, and iodine (group 17) i s a nonmetal; KI is predicted to be ionic.
b. Hydrogen (group 1) is a nonmetal, and oxygen (group 16) is a nonmetal; H O is predicted to be molecular.
c. Carbon (group 14) is a nonmetal, hydrogen (group 1) is a nonmetal, and chlorine (group 17) is a nonmetal; CHCl is
predicted to be molecular.
d. Lithium (group 1) is a metal, and carbonate is a polyat omic ion; Li CO is predicted to be ionic.
Using the periodic table, predict whether the following co mpounds are ionic or covalent:
a. SO
b. CaF
c. N H
d. Al (SO)
Answer a
molecular
Answer b
ionic
Answer c
molecular
Answer d
ionic2 2 4
Example: Predicting the Type of Bonding in Compounds
2 2
2 3
2 2
2 3
Exercise
2 4
2 4 3

9.3.4.8 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/203457Contributors and Attributions
Summary
Metals (particularly those in groups 1 and 2) tend to lose the number of electrons that would leave them wi th the same number of
electrons as in the preceding noble gas in the perio dic table. By this means, a positively charged ion i s formed. Similarly, nonmetals
(especially those in groups 16 and 17, and, to a les ser extent, those in Group 15) can gain the number of electrons needed to
provide atoms with the same number of electrons as in the next noble gas in the periodic table. Thus, no nmetals tend to form
negative ions. Positively charged ions are called catio ns, and negatively charged ions are called anions. Ion s can be either
monatomic (containing only one atom) or polyatomic (cont aining more than one atom).
Compounds that contain ions are called ionic compou nds. Ionic compounds generally form from metals and nonmetals.
Compounds that do not contain ions, but instead con sist of atoms bonded tightly together in molecules (unc harged groups of atoms
that behave as a single unit), are called covalent compou nds. Covalent compounds usually form from two or more n onmetals.
Glossary
covalent bond
attractive force between the nuclei of a molecule’s atoms and pairs of electrons between the atoms
covalent compound
(also, molecular compound) composed of molecules formed by atoms of two or more different elements
ionic bond
electrostatic forces of attraction between the oppositely c harged ions of an ionic compound
ionic compound
compound composed of cations and anions combined in r atios, yielding an electrically neutral substance
molecular compound
(also, covalent compound) composed of molecules formed by at oms of two or more different elements
monatomic ion
ion composed of a single atom
polyatomic ion
ion composed of more than one atom
oxyanion
polyatomic anion composed of a central atom bonded to ox ygen atoms
Contributors and Attributions
Paul Flowers (University of North Carolina - Pembroke), Kla us Theopold (University of Delaware) and Richard Langl ey
(Stephen F. Austin State University) with contributing au thors. Textbook content produced by OpenStax College i s licensed
under a Creative Commons Attribution License 4.0 license. Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/85abf1932bd...a7ac8df6@9.110).
This page titled 9.3.4: Molecular and Ionic Compounds is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax.

9.3.5.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2034589.3.5: Chemical Nomenclature
Derive names for common types of inorganic compounds us ing a systematic approach
Nomenclature, a collection of rules for naming things, is important in science and in many other situati ons. This module describes
an approach that is used to name simple ionic and m olecular compounds, such as NaCl, CaCO, and N O. The si mplest of these are
binary compounds, those containing only two elements, but we will also consider how to name ionic compounds containing
polyatomic ions, and one specific, very important clas s of compounds known as acids (subsequent chapters in this text will focus on
these compounds in great detail). We will limit our attention here to inorganic compounds, compounds tha t are composed
principally of elements other than carbon, and will fo llow the nomenclature guidelines proposed by IUPAC. Th e rules for organic
compounds, in which carbon is the principle element, will be treated in a later chapter on organic chemistry.
Ionic Compounds
To name an inorganic compound, we need to consider th e answers to several questions. First, is the compound ionic or molecular? If
the compound is ionic, does the metal form ions of only one type (fixed charge) or more than one type (v ariable charge)? Are the
ions monatomic or polyatomic? If the compound is mol ecular, does it contain hydrogen? If so, does it also contain oxygen? From
the answers we derive, we place the compound in an appro priate category and then name it accordingly. We will b egin with the
nomenclature rules for ionic compounds.
Compounds Containing Only Monatomic Ions
The name of a binary compound containing monatomic i ons consists of the name of the cation (the name of the metal) followed by
the name of the anion (the name of the nonmetallic e lement with its ending replaced by the suffix – ide). Some examples are given in
Table.
Table: Names of Some Ionic Compounds
NaCl, sodium chloride Na O, sodium oxide
KBr, potassium bromide CdS, cadmium sulfide
CaI, calcium iodide Mg N, magnesium nitride
CsF, cesium fluoride Ca P, calcium phosphide
LiCl, lithium chloride Al C, aluminum carbide
Compounds Containing Polyatomic Ions
Compounds containing polyatomic ions are named simi larly to those containing only monatomic ions, exce pt there is no need to
change to an – ide ending, since the suffix is already present in the nam e of the anion. Examples are shown in Table.
Table: Names of Some Polyatomic Ionic Compounds
KC H O, potassium acetate (NH)Cl, ammonium chloride
NaHCO, sodium bicarbonate CaSO, calcium sulfate
Al (CO), aluminum carbonate Mg (PO), magnesium phosphate
Every day you encounter and use a large number of io nic compounds. Some of these compounds, where they are found, and
what they are used for are listed in Table. Look at t he label or ingredients list on the various products that you use during
the next few days, and see if you run into any of thos e in this table, or find other ionic compounds that you could now name or
write as a formula.Learning Objectives
3 2 4
2 3 2
3 2
4 3
2 3 2 4
3 4
2 3 3 3 4 2
Ionic Compounds in Your Cabinets

9.3.5.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/203458Table: Everyday Ionic Compounds
Ionic Compound Name Use
NaCl sodium chloride ordinary table salt
KI potassium iodide added to “iodized” salt for thyroid health
NaF sodium fluoride ingredient in toothpaste
NaHCO sodium bicarbonatebaking soda; used in cooking (and in
antacids)
Na CO sodium carbonate washing soda; used in cleaning agen ts
NaOCl sodium hypochlorite active ingredient in househol d bleach
CaCO calcium carbonate ingredient in antacids
Mg(OH) magnesium hydroxide ingredient in antacids
Al(OH) aluminum hydroxide ingredient in antacids
NaOH sodium hydroxide lye; used as drain cleaner
K PO potassium phosphate food additive (many purposes)
MgSO magnesium sulfate added to purified water
Na HPO sodium hydrogen phosphateanti-caking agent; used in powdered
products
Na SO sodium sulfite preservative
Compounds Containing a Metal Ion with a Variable Charge
Most of the transition metals can form two or more catio ns with different charges. Compounds of these metals with nonmetals are
named with the same method as compounds in the first category, except the charge of the metal ion is spec ified by a Roman numeral
in parentheses after the name of the metal. The char ge of the metal ion is determined from the formula of the compound and the
charge of the anion. For example, consider binary ion ic compounds of iron and chlorine. Iron typically ex hibits a charge of either 2+
or 3+, and the two corresponding compound formulas are FeCl and FeCl. The simplest name, “iron chloride,” will, in this case, be
ambiguous, as it does not distinguish between these two compounds. In cases like this, the charge of the m etal ion is included as a
Roman numeral in parentheses immediately following th e metal name. These two compounds are then unambiguo usly named
iron(II) chloride and iron(III) chloride, respectively. Ot her examples are provided in Table.
Table: Names of Some Transition Metal Ionic Compounds
Transition Metal Ionic Compound Name
FeCl iron(III) chloride
Hg O mercury(I) oxide
HgO mercury(II) oxide
Cu (PO) copper(II) phosphate
Out-of-date nomenclature used the suffixes – ic and – ous to designate metals with higher and lower charges, re spectively: Iron(III)
chloride, FeCl, was previously called ferric chloride, an d iron(II) chloride, FeCl, was known as ferrous chloride. Though this
naming convention has been largely abandoned by the scientific community, it remains in use by some seg ments of industry. For
example, you may see the words stannous fluoride on a tube of toothpaste. This represents the formula Sn F, which is more3
2 3
3 4
2 4
2 3
2 3
3 4 2
3 2

9.3.5.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/203458properly named tin(II) fluoride. The other fluoride o f tin is SnF, which was previously called stannic fluor ide but is now named
tin(IV) fluoride.
Name the following ionic compounds, which contain a metal that can have more than one ionic charge:
a. Fe S
b. CuSe
c. GaN
d. CrCl
e. Ti (SO)
Solution
The anions in these compounds have a fixed negative charge (S, Se, N, Cl, and), and the compounds must b e
neutral. Because the total number of positive charges in each compound must equal the total number of ne gative charges, the
positive ions must be Fe, Cu, Ga, Cr, and Ti. These charges ar e used in the names of the metal ions:
a. iron(III) sulfide
b. copper(II) selenide
c. gallium(III) nitride
d. chromium(III) chloride
e. titanium(III) sulfate
Write the formulas of the following ionic compounds:
a. chromium(III) phosphide
b. mercury(II) sulfide
c. manganese(II) phosphate
d. copper(I) oxide
e. chromium(VI) fluoride
Answer a
CrP
Answer b
HgS
Answer c
Mn (PO)
Answer d
Cu O
Answer e
CrF
In the early 1990s, legal file clerk Erin Brockovich (Figure) discovered a high rate of serious illnesse s in the small town
of Hinckley, California. Her investigation eventually l inked the illnesses to groundwater contaminated by C r(VI) used by
Pacific Gas & Electric (PG&E) to fight corrosion in a nearb y natural gas pipeline. As dramatized in the film Erin Brokovich (for
which Julia Roberts won an Oscar), Erin and lawyer Edward Masry sued PG&E for contaminating the water near Hinckley in4
Example: Naming Ionic Compounds
2 3
2 4 3
2− 2− 3− −
3+ 2+ 3+ 3+ 3+
Exercise
3 4 2
Erin Brokovich and Chromium Contamination

9.3.5.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/2034581993. The settlement they won in 1996—$333 million—wa s the largest amount ever awarded for a direct-action lawsuit in the
US at that time.
Figure: (a) Erin Brockovich found that Cr(VI), used by PG& E, had contaminated the Hinckley, California, water supply.
(b) The Cr(VI) ion is often present in water as the po lyatomic ions chromate, (left), and dichromate, (r ight).
Chromium compounds are widely used in industry, such a s for chrome plating, in dye-making, as preservative s, and to prevent
corrosion in cooling tower water, as occurred near Hinck ley. In the environment, chromium exists primarily in either the Cr(III)
or Cr(VI) forms. Cr(III), an ingredient of many vitamin and nutritional supplements, forms compounds that ar e not very soluble
in water, and it has low toxicity. Cr(VI), on the other h and, is much more toxic and forms compounds that are reasonably
soluble in water. Exposure to small amounts of Cr(VI) can lead to damage of the respiratory, gastrointesti nal, and immune
systems, as well as the kidneys, liver, blood, and skin.
Despite cleanup efforts, Cr(VI) groundwater contaminat ion remains a problem in Hinckley and other location s across the globe.
A 2010 study by the Environmental Working Group found that of 35 US cities tested, 31 had higher levels of Cr(VI) in their tap
water than the public health goal of 0.02 parts per billi on set by the California Environmental Protection Agency.
Molecular (Covalent) Compounds
The bonding characteristics of inorganic molecular compounds are different from ionic compounds, and th ey are named using a
different system as well. The charges of cations and anions dictate their ratios in ionic compounds, so sp ecifying the names of the
ions provides sufficient information to determine ch emical formulas. However, because covalent bonding al lows for significant
variation in the combination ratios of the atoms in a molecule, the names for molecular compounds must explicitly identify these
ratios.
Compounds Composed of Two Elements
When two nonmetallic elements form a molecular compou nd, several combination ratios are often possible. For e xample, carbon
and oxygen can form the compounds CO and CO. Since the se are different substances with different properties, they cannot both
have the same name (they cannot both be called carbo n oxide). To deal with this situation, we use a namin g method that is
somewhat similar to that used for ionic compounds, b ut with added prefixes to specify the numbers of atom s of each element. The
name of the more metallic element (the one farther to the left and/or bottom of the periodic table) is fi rst, followed by the name of
the more nonmetallic element (the one farther to th e right and/or top) with its ending changed to the su ffix – ide. The numbers of
atoms of each element are designated by the Greek prefixes shown in Table.
Table: Nomenclature Prefixes2

9.3.5.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/203458N
u
m
b
e
rPrefix NumberP
r
e
f
i
x
s
o
m
e
t
i
m
e
s
o
m
i
t
t
e
d
)mono6h
e
x
a
2 di- 7h
e
p
t
a
3 tri- 8o
c
t
a
4 tetra- 9n
o
n
a
5 penta- 10d
e
c
a
When only one atom of the first element is present, t he prefix mono - is usually deleted from that part. Thus, is named carbon
monoxide, and is called carbon dioxide. When two vowe ls are adjacent, the a in the Greek prefix is usually dropped. Some
other examples are shown in Table.

9.3.5.6 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/203458Table: Names of Some Molecular Compounds Composed of T wo Elements

9.3.5.7 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/203458C
o
m
p
o
u
n
dName CompoundN
a
m
e
S
O sulfur dioxide
BClb
o
r
o
n
t
r
i
c
h
l
o
r
i
d
e
S
O sulfur trioxide SFs
u
l
f
u
r
h
e
x
a
f
l
u
o
r
i
d
e
N
Onitrogen dioxide PF p
h
o
s
p
h
o
r
u23

9.3.5.8 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/203458C
o
m
p
o
u
n
dName CompoundN
a
m
e
s
p
e
n
t
a
f
l
u
o
r
i
d
e
N
Odinitrogen tetroxide P Ot
e
t
r
a
p
h
o
s
p
h
o
r
u
s
d
e
c
a
o
x
i
d
e
N
Odinitrogen pentoxide IF i
o
d
i
n2
44 10

9.3.5.9 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/203458C
o
m
p
o
u
n
dName CompoundN
a
m
e
e
h
e
p
t
a
f
l
u
o
r
i
d
e
There are a few common names that you will encounter as you continue your study of chemistry. For example, a lthough NO is often
called nitric oxide, its proper name is nitrogen mo noxide. Similarly, N O is known as nitrous oxide even th ough our rules would
specify the name dinitrogen monoxide. (And H O is usua lly called water, not dihydrogen monoxide.) You should commit to
memory the common names of compounds as you encounter the m.
Name the following covalent compounds:
a. SF
b. N O
c. Cl O
d. P O
Solution
Because these compounds consist solely of nonmetals, we use prefixes to designate the number of atoms of each el ement:
a. sulfur hexafluoride
b. dinitrogen trioxide
c. dichlorine heptoxide
d. tetraphosphorus hexoxide
Write the formulas for the following compounds:
a. phosphorus pentachloride
b. dinitrogen monoxide
c. iodine heptafluoride
d. carbon tetrachloride
Answer a2
Example: Naming Covalent Compounds
2 3
2 7
4 6
Exercise

9.3.5.10 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/203458PCl
Answer b
N O
Answer c
IF
Answer d
CCl
Binary Acids
Some compounds containing hydrogen are members of an important class of substances known as acids. The che mistry of these
compounds is explored in more detail in later chapte rs of this text, but for now, it will suffice to note that many acids release
hydrogen ions, H, when dissolved in water. To denote t his distinct chemical property, a mixture of water wit h an acid is given a
name derived from the compound’s name. If the compoun d is a binary acid (comprised of hydrogen and one ot her nonmetallic
element):
1. The word “hydrogen” is changed to the prefix hydro2. The other nonmetallic element name is modified by addi ng the suffix - ic
3. The word “acid” is added as a second word
For example, when the gas (hydrogen chloride) is dissol ved in water, the solution is called hydrochloric acid. Several other
examples of this nomenclature are shown in Table.
Table: Names of Some Simple Acids
Name of Gas Name of Acid
HF(g), hydrogen fluoride HF(aq), hydrofluoric acid
HCl(g), hydrogen chloride HCl(aq), hydrochloric acid
HBr(g), hydrogen bromide HBr(aq), hydrobromic acid
HI(g), hydrogen iodide HI(aq), hydroiodic acid
H S(g), hydrogen sulfide H S(aq), hydrosulfuric acid
Oxyacids
Many compounds containing three or more elements (such as organic compounds or coordination compounds) are s ubject to
specialized nomenclature rules that you will learn la ter. However, we will briefly discuss the important compo unds known as
oxyacids, compounds that contain hydrogen, oxygen, a nd at least one other element, and are bonded in suc h a way as to impart
acidic properties to the compound (you will learn the d etails of this in a later chapter). Typical oxyacids consist of hydrogen
combined with a polyatomic, oxygen-containing ion. To na me oxyacids:
1. Omit “hydrogen”
2. Start with the root name of the anion
3. Replace – ate with – ic, or – ite with – ous
4. Add “acid”
For example, consider H CO (which you might be tempted to call “hydrogen carbonate”). To name this correctly, “ hydrogen” is
omitted; the – ate of carbonate is replace with – ic; and acid is added—so its name is carbonic acid. Oth er examples are given in
Table. There are some exceptions to the general nam ing method (e.g., H SO is called sulfuric acid, not sul fic acid, and
H SO is sulfurous, not sulfous, acid).
Table: Names of Common Oxyacids5
2 2
2 3
2 4
2 3

9.3.5.11 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/203458Formula Anion Name Acid Name
HC H O acetate acetic acid
HNO nitrate nitric acid
HNO nitrite nitrous acid
HClO perchlorate perchloric acid
H CO carbonate carbonic acid
H SO sulfate sulfuric acid
H SO sulfite sulfurous acid
H PO phosphate phosphoric acid
Contributors and Attributions
Summary
Chemists use nomenclature rules to clearly name comp ounds. Ionic and molecular compounds are named using somewhat-different
methods. Binary ionic compounds typically consist o f a metal and a nonmetal. The name of the metal is written first, followed by
the name of the nonmetal with its ending changed to –ide. For example, K O is called potassium oxide. If the meta l can form ions
with different charges, a Roman numeral in parenthese s follows the name of the metal to specify its charge. Thus, FeCl is iron(II)
chloride and FeCl is iron(III) chloride. Some compound s contain polyatomic ions; the names of common polya tomic ions should
be memorized. Molecular compounds can form compounds with different ratios of their elements, so prefixes are used to specify the
numbers of atoms of each element in a molecule of t he compound. Examples include SF, sulfur hexafluoride, and N O, dinitrogen
tetroxide. Acids are an important class of compounds c ontaining hydrogen and having special nomenclature r ules. Binary acids are
named using the prefix hydro-, changing the – ide suffix to – ic, and adding “acid;” HCl is hydrochloric acid. Oxyaci ds are named by
changing the ending of the anion (-ate to –ic, and -ite to -ous) and adding “acid;” H CO is carbonic acid.
Glossary
binary acid
compound that contains hydrogen and one other element, bonded in a way that imparts acidic properties to the co mpound
(ability to release H ions when dissolved in water)
binary compound
compound containing two different elements.
oxyacid
compound that contains hydrogen, oxygen, and one other element, bonded in a way that imparts acidic properties t o the
compound (ability to release H ions when dissolved in wa ter)
nomenclature
system of rules for naming objects of interest
Contributors and Attributions
Paul Flowers (University of North Carolina - Pembroke), Kla us Theopold (University of Delaware) and Richard Langl ey
(Stephen F. Austin State University) with contributing au thors. Textbook content produced by OpenStax College is licensed
under a Creative Commons Attribution License 4.0 license. Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/85abf1932bd...a7ac8df6@9.110).
This page titled 9.3.5: Chemical Nomenclature is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax.2 3 2
2 3
2 4
2 3
3 4
6 2 4
2 3

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
1.1: Stoichiometry- Chemical Formulas and Equations
Stoichiometry is the calculation of relative quantiti es of reactants and products in chemical reactions. St oichiometry is founded on
the law of conservation of mass where the total mass of the reactants equals the tot al mass of the products leading to the insight
that the relations among quantities of reactants and products typically form a ratio of positive integer s. This means that if the
amounts of the separate reactants are known, then the amount of the product can be calculated. Conversely, if one reactant has a
known quantity and the quantity of product can be em pirically determined, then the amount of the other r eactants can also be
calculated.
We begin this chapter by describing the relationshi p between the mass of a sample of a substance and its composition. We then
develop methods for determining the quantities of co mpounds produced or consumed in chemical reactions, and we describe some
fundamental types of chemical reactions. By applying the concepts and skills introduced in this chapter, yo u will be able to explain
what happens to the sugar in a candy bar you eat, wha t reaction occurs in a battery when you start your ca r, what may be causing
the “ozone hole” over Antarctica, and how we might preven t the hole’s growth.
1.1.1: Chemical Equations
1.1.2: Some Simple Patterns of Chemical Reactivity
1.1.3: Avogadro's Number and the Mole
1.1.4: Empirical and Molecular Formulas
1.1.5: Empirical Formulas from Analysis
1.1.6: Reaction Stoichiometry
1.1.7: Limiting Reactants
1.1: Stoichiometry- Chemical Formulas and Equations is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
LibreTexts.

1.1.1.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1699521.1.1: Chemical Equations
To describe a chemical reaction.
To calculate the quantities of compounds produced or con sumed in a chemical reaction
What happens to matter when it undergoes chemical cha nges? The Law of conservation of mass says that " Atoms are neither
created, nor distroyed, during any chemical reaction." Thus, the same collection of atoms is present after a reaction as before the
reaction. The changes that occur during a reaction just involve the rearrangement of atoms. In this section we will discuss
stoichiometry (the "measurement of elements").
Chemical Equations
As shown in Figure, applying a small amount of heat to a pile of orange ammonium dichromate powder results in a vigorous
reaction known as the ammonium dichromate volcano. Hea t, light, and gas are produced as a large pile of fluf fy green
chromium(III) oxide forms. This reaction is describe d with a chemical equation, an expression that gives t he identities and
quantities of the substances in a chemical reaction.
Figure: An Ammonium Dichromate Volcano: Change during a Chemical Re action. The starting material is solid ammonium
dichromate. A chemical reaction transforms it to solid chromium(III) oxide, depicted showing a portion of its chained st ructure,
nitrogen gas, and water vapor (in addition, energy in the f orm of heat and light is released). During the reaction, the distribution of
atoms changes, but the number of atoms of each element does not c hange. Because the numbers of each type of atom are the same
in the reactants and the products, the chemical equation is balanced. Figure used with permission from Wikipedia. See video here:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CW4hN0dYnkM
Chemical reactions are represented on paper by chemical equations. For example, hydrogen gas (H) can react (burn) with oxygen
gas (O) to form water (H O). The chemical equation for this reaction is written as:
Chemical formulas and other symbols are used to indic ate the starting materials, or reactants, which by co nvention are written on
the left side of the equation, and the final compoun ds, or products, which are written on the right. An ar row points from the reactant
to the products. The chemical reaction for the ammonium dic hromate volcano in Figure is
The arrow is read as “yields” or “reacts to form.” Eq uation indicates that ammonium dichromate (the rea ctant) yields
chromium(III) oxide, nitrogen, and water (the produc ts). The equation for this reaction is even more inform ative when written as
follows:
Equation is identical to Equation except for the a ddition of abbreviations in parentheses to indicate the physical state
of each species. The abbreviations are (s) for solid, (l) for liquid, (g) for gas, and (aq) for an aque ous solution, a solution of theLearning Objectives
2 2

1.1.1.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169952substance in water.
Consistent with the law of conservation of mass, the n umbers of each type of atom are the same on both sid es of Equations
and. Each side of the reaction has two chromium atom s, seven oxygen atoms, two nitrogen atoms, and eight h ydrogen
atoms.
In a balanced chemical equation, both the numbers o f each type of atom and the total charge are the sa me on both sides. Equations
and are balanced chemical equations. What is differ ent on each side of the equation is how the atoms ar e arranged to
make molecules or ions. A chemical reaction represents a change in the distribution of atoms, but not in the number of atoms. In
this reaction, and in most chemical reactions, bonds a re broken in the reactants (here, Cr–O and N–H bonds), and new bonds are
formed to create the products (here, O–H and N≡N bonds). If the numbers of each type of atom are different o n the two sides of a
chemical equation, then the equation is unbalanced, and it cannot correctly describe what happens during the reaction. To proceed,
the equation must first be balanced.
A chemical reaction changes only the distribution of a toms, not the number of atoms.

1.1.1.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169952

Balancing Simple Chemical Equations

When a chemist encounters a new reaction, it does no t usually come with a label that shows the balanced c hemical equation.
Instead, the chemist must identify the reactants and products and then write them in the form of a chemica l equation that may or
may not be balanced as first written. Consider, for example, the combustion of n-heptane (), an important component of
gasoline:

1.1.1.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169952

The complete combustion of any hydrocarbon with sufficient oxygen always yields carbon dioxide and water.

Equation is not balanced: the numbers of each type of atom on the reactant side of the equation (7 car bon atoms, 16
hydrogen atoms, and 2 oxygen atoms) is not the same as the numbers of each type of atom on the product sid e (1 carbon atom, 2
hydrogen atoms, and 3 oxygen atoms). Consequently, t he coefficients of the reactants and products must be adjusted to give the

1.1.1.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169952same numbers of atoms of each type on both sides of the equation. Because the identities of the reactant s and products are fixed,
the equation cannot be balanced by changing the sub scripts of the reactants or the products. To do so woul d change the chemical
identity of the species being described, as illustrated in Figure.

1.1.1.6 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169952

Figure: Balancing Equations. You cannot change subscripts in a chemical formula to balance a chemical equation; you can
change only the coefficients. Changing subscripts cha nges the ratios of atoms in the molecule and the resultin g chemical
properties. For example, water (H O) and hydrogen peroxid e (H O) are chemically distinct substances. H O decompose s to H O
and O gas when it comes in contact with the metal platinu m, whereas no such reaction occurs between water and plati num.

2 2 2 2 2 2

1.1.1.7 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169952

The simplest and most generally useful method for bal ancing chemical equations is “inspection,” better k nown as trial and error.
The following is an efficient approach to balancing a chem ical equation using this method.

1. Identify the most complex substance.
2. Beginning with that substance, choose an element that ap pears in only one reactant and one product, if possible. Ad just the
coefficients to obtain the same number of atoms of thi s element on both sides.
3. Balance polyatomic ions (if present) as a unit.
4. Balance the remaining atoms, usually ending with the leas t complex substance and using fractional coefficients if
necessary. If a fractional coefficient has been used, mu ltiply both sides of the equation by the denominator to obtain whole
numbers for the coefficients.
5. Check your work by counting the numbers of atoms of each ki nd on both sides of the equation to be sure that the chem ical
equation is balanced.

Steps in Balancing a Chemical Equation

1.1.1.8 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169952

To demonstrate this approach, let’s use the combustion of n -heptane (Equation) as an example.
1. Identify the most complex substance. The most complex substance is the one with the largest numb er of different atoms,
which is. We will assume initially that the final balanc ed chemical equation contains 1 molecule or formula unit o f
this substance.
2. Adjust the coefficients. Try to adjust the coefficients of the molecules on the other side of the equation to obtain the same
numbers of atoms on both sides. Because one molecule of n -heptane contains 7 carbon atoms, we need 7 CO molecules,
each of which contains 1 carbon atom, on the right side:
3. Balance polyatomic ions as a unit. There are no polyatomic ions to be considered in this reaction.
4. Balance the remaining atoms. Because one molecule of n-heptane contains 16 hydrogen atoms, we need 8 H2O
molecules, each of which contains 2 hydrogen atoms, on the r ight side:
The carbon and hydrogen atoms are now balanced, but we ha ve 22 oxygen atoms on the right side and only 2 oxygen at oms
on the left. We can balance the oxygen atoms by adjustin g the coefficient in front of the least complex substance, O, on the
reactant side:
5. Check your work. The equation is now balanced, and there are no fractio nal coefficients: there are 7 carbon atoms, 16
hydrogen atoms, and 22 oxygen atoms on each side. Always che ck to be sure that a chemical equation is balanced.The
assumption that the final balanced chemical equation cont ains only one molecule or formula unit of the most compl ex
substance is not always valid, but it is a good place to sta rt.

Example: Combustion of Heptane

1.1.1.9 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169952

Consider, for example, a similar reaction, the combu stion of isooctane (). Because the combustion of any h ydrocarbon
with oxygen produces carbon dioxide and water, the unbalan ced chemical equation is as follows:
1. Identify the most complex substance. Begin the balancing process by assuming that the final balanced chemical equation
contains a single molecule of isooctane.
2. Adjust the coefficients. The first element that appears only once in the reac tants is carbon: 8 carbon atoms in isooctane
means that there must be 8 CO molecules in the products:
3. Balance polyatomic ions as a unit. This step does not apply to this equation.
4. Balance the remaining atoms. Eighteen hydrogen atoms in isooctane means that ther e must be 9 H O molecules in the
products:
The carbon and hydrogen atoms are now balanced, but we ha ve 25 oxygen atoms on the right side and only 2 oxygen at oms
on the left. We can balance the least complex substance, O, but because there are 2 oxygen atoms per O molecule, we
must use a fractional coefficient (25/2) to balance the ox ygen atoms:
Equation is now balanced, but we usually write equations with whole-number coefficients. We can eliminate the
fractional coefficient by multiplying all coefficients o n both sides of the chemical equation by 2:
5. Check your work. The balanced chemical equation has 16 carbon atoms, 3 6 hydrogen atoms, and 50 oxygen atoms on
each side.

Example: Combustion of Isooctane
2 2

1.1.1.10 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169952

Balancing equations requires some practice on your p art as well as some common sense. If you find yourself using very large
coefficients or if you have spent several minutes witho ut success, go back and make sure that you have writte n the formulas of the
reactants and products correctly.

The reaction of the mineral hydroxyapatite () with p hosphoric acid and water gives (calcium
dihydrogen phosphate monohydrate). Write and balance t he equation for this reaction.
Given: reactants and product
Asked for: balanced chemical equation
Strategy:
A. Identify the product and the reactants and then write the unbalanced chemical equation.
B. Follow the steps for balancing a chemical equation.
Solution:
A We must first identify the product and reactants an d write an equation for the reaction. The formulas fo r hydroxyapatite and
calcium dihydrogen phosphate monohydrate are given in the problem (recall that phosphoric acid is H PO). The initial
(unbalanced) equation is as follows:
1. B Identify the most complex substance. We start by assuming that only one molecule or for mula unit of the most complex
substance,, appears in the balanced chemical equatio n.Example: Hydroxyapatite
3 4

1.1.1.11 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1699522. Adjust the coefficients. Because calcium is present in only one reactant and one product, we begin with it. One formula unit
of contains 5 calcium atoms, so we need 5 Ca(H PO) •H O on the right side:
3. Balance polyatomic ions as a unit. It is usually easier to balance an equation if we r ecognize that certain combinations of
atoms occur on both sides. In this equation, the poly atomic phosphate ion (PO), shows up in three places. In H PO, the
phosphate ion is combined with three H ions to make phosphoric acid (H PO), whereas in Ca(H PO) • H O it is combine d
with two H ions to give the dihydrogen phosphate ion. Thus it is easier to balance PO as a unit rather tha n counting
individual phosphorus and oxygen atoms. There are 10 PO units on the right side but only 4 on the left. T he simplest way to
balance the PO units is to place a coefficient of 7 in fro nt of H PO:
Although OH is also a polyatomic ion, it does not app ear on both sides of the equation. So oxygen and hydr ogen must be
balanced separately.
4. Balance the remaining atoms. We now have 30 hydrogen atoms on the right side bu t only 24 on the left. We can balance
the hydrogen atoms using the least complex substance, H O, by placing a coefficient of 4 in front of H O on the left side,
giving a total of 4 H O molecules:
The equation is now balanced. Even though we have not explicitly balanced the oxygen atoms, there are 45 oxygen atoms on
each side.
5. Check your work. Both sides of the equation contain 5 calcium atom s, 10 phosphorus atoms, 30 hydrogen atoms, and
45 oxygen atoms.

Fermentation is a biochemical process that enables yea st cells to live in the absence of oxygen. Humans have exploited it for
centuries to produce wine and beer and make bread ris e. In fermentation, sugars such as glucose are conv erted to ethanol (
and carbon dioxide. Write a balanced chemical reaction for the fermentation of glucose.2 4 2 2
43−3 4
+3 4 2 4 2 2
+4
4 3 4
2 2
Exercise: Fermentation

1.1.1.12 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169952Answer

Interpreting Chemical Equations (Part 1)

In addition to providing qualitative information ab out the identities and physical states of the react ants and products, a balanced
chemical equation provides quantitative information. Specifically, it gives the relative amounts of react ants and products consumed
or produced in a reaction. The number of atoms, mole cules, or formula units of a reactant or a product i n a balanced chemical
equation is the coefficient of that species (e.g., the 4 preceding H O in Equation). When no coefficient i s written in front of a2

1.1.1.13 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169952species, the coefficient is assumed to be 1. As illust rated in Figure, the coefficients allow Equation to be interpreted in
any of the following ways:

Two NH ions and one Cr O ion yield 1 formula unit of Cr O, 1 N molecule, and 4 H O molecules.
One formula unit of (NH) Cr O yields 1 formula unit of Cr O, 1 molecule of N, and 4 molecules of H O.

4+2 72−2 3 2 2
4 2 2 7 2 3 2 2

1.1.1.14 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169952

1.1.1.15 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169952

1.1.1.16 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169952

Figure: The Balanced Chemical Reaction for the Ammonium Dichromate Vol cano

1.1.1.17 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169952

The chemical equation does not, however, show the rate o f the reaction (rapidly, slowly, or not at all) or whet her energy in the form
of heat or light is given off. These issues are consider ed in more detail in later chapters.

An important chemical reaction was analyzed by Antoine Lavoisier, an 18th-century French chemist, who was intere sted in the
chemistry of living organisms as well as simple chemic al systems. In a classic series of experiments, he m easured the carbon
dioxide and heat produced by a guinea pig during re spiration, in which organic compounds are used as fuel to produce energy,
carbon dioxide, and water. Lavoisier found that the r atio of heat produced to carbon dioxide exhaled was si milar to the ratio
observed for the reaction of charcoal with oxygen in the air to produce carbon dioxide—a process chemist s call combustion. Based
on these experiments, he proposed that “Respiration is a combustion, slow it is true, but otherwise perfec tly similar to that of
charcoal.” Lavoisier was correct, although the organ ic compounds consumed in respiration are substantiall y different from those
found in charcoal. One of the most important fuels in the human body is glucose (), which is virtually th e only fuel used in
the brain. Thus combustion and respiration are examples o f chemical reactions.

1.1.1.18 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169952

The balanced chemical equation for the combustion of g lucose in the laboratory (or in the brain) is as follows:
Construct a table showing how to interpret the informat ion in this equation in terms of single molecule of glucos e.
Strategy: Use the coefficients from the balanced chemical equation to determine the molecular ratios.Example: Combustion of Glucose

1.1.1.19 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169952Solution: This equation is balanced as written: each side ha s 6 carbon atoms, 18 oxygen atoms, and 12 hydrogen at oms. We
can therefore use the coefficients directly to obtain t he desired information.
One molecule of glucose reacts with 6 molecules of O to yield 6 molecules of CO and 6 molecules of H O.

Summary

A chemical reaction is described by a chemical equat ion that gives the identities and quantities of the reactants and the products. In
a chemical reaction, one or more substances are tran sformed to new substances. A chemical reaction is desc ribed by a chemical
equation, an expression that gives the identities and quanti ties of the substances involved in a reaction. A chem ical equation shows2 2 2

1.1.1.20 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169952the starting compound(s)—the reactants —on the left and the final compound(s)—the products —on the right, separated by an
arrow. In a balanced chemical equation, the numbers o f atoms of each element and the total charge are the same on both sides of
the equation. The number of atoms, molecules, or formu la units of a reactant or product in a balanced che mical equation is the
coefficient of that species

1.1.1: Chemical Equations is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1.1.2.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1699531.1.2: Some Simple Patterns of Chemical Reactivity
To introduce the basic patterns of chemical reaction.
There is an underlying explanation of why a reaction takes place from an underlying chemical theory bas ed on chemical reactivity.
In this sections, we discussed various reactions to identify key chemical trends that allows chemists to p redict the outcome of
chemical reactions. By recognizing general patterns of chemical reactivity, you will be able to successful ly predict the products
formed by a given combination of reactants We can o ften predict a reaction if we have seen a similar rea ction before. For example,
sodium (Na) reacts with water () to form sodium hydroxide () and gas:
with indicating aqueous liquid. As discussed later, po tassium () is in the same family (column) of element s as sodium and
exhibits similar chemistry. Therefore, one might predict that the reaction of with would be similar to that of:
In fact, all alkali metals react with water to form thei r hydroxide compounds and hydrogen.
Combination and Decomposition Reactions
In combination reactions, two or more compounds react to form a single, more co mplex compound. Many elements react with one
another in this fashion to form compounds. The general ch emical equation for combination reaction is:
and an example includes the generation of ammonia (from ni trogen (and hydrogen ():
In decomposition reactions one substance undergoes a reaction to form two or mo re simpler products. Such reactions often occur
when compounds are heated or electricity is added. The g eneral chemical equation for decomposition reaction is:
For example, the thermal decomposition of limestone () g enerates quicklime () and carbon dioxide ()
Combustion in Air
Combustion reactions are rapid reactions that produce a flame. Most common combustion reactions involve oxygen (O) from the
air as a reactant. A common class of compounds which can participate i n combustion reactions are hydrocarbons (compounds that
contain only carbon and hydrogen).
When hydrocarbons are combusted they react with oxyg en () to form carbon dioxide () and water (). For exam ple, when
propane is burned the reaction is:
Other compounds which contain carbon, hydrogen and oxy gen (e.g. the alcohol methanol CH OH, and the sugar glucose C H O)
also combust in the presence of oxygen () to produce an d.
1.1.2: Some Simple Patterns of Chemical Reactivity is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
LibreTexts.Learning Objectives
3 6 12 6

1.1.3.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1699551.1.3: Avogadro's Number and the Mole
To calculate the molecular mass of a covalent compound a nd the formula mass of an ionic compound.
To calculate the number of atoms, molecules, or formula units in a sample of a substance.
To interpret a chemical equation in terms of mole-to-mole ratios.
Molecular and Formula Masses
The molecular mass of a substance is the sum of the a verage masses of the atoms in one molecule of a substa nce. It is calculated by
adding together the atomic masses of the elements i n the substance, each multiplied by its subscript (wri tten or implied) in the
molecular formula. Because the units of atomic mass are atomic mass units, the units of molecular mass are also atomic mass units.
The procedure for calculating molecular masses is illust rated in Example.
Calculate the molecular mass of ethanol, whose conde nsed structural formula is. Among its many uses, eth anol is a
fuel for internal combustion engines.
Given: molecule
Asked for: molecular mass
Strategy:
A. Determine the number of atoms of each element in the m olecule.
B. Obtain the atomic masses of each element from the peri odic table and multiply the atomic mass of each element by the
number of atoms of that element.
C. Add together the masses to give the molecular mass.
Solution:
A The molecular formula of ethanol may be written in t hree different ways: (which illustrates the presence of an
ethyl group, CH CH, and an −OH group),, and; all show t hat ethanol has two carbon atoms, six hydrogen
atoms, and one oxygen atom.
B Taking the atomic masses from the periodic table, we o btain
C Adding together the masses gives the molecular mass:
Calculate the molecular mass of trichlorofluorometha ne, also known as Freon-11, whose condensed structural f ormula is
. Until recently, it was used as a refrigerant. The struc ture of a molecule of Freon-11 is as follows:
Learning Objectives
Example: Molecular Mass of Ethanol
3 2−
Exercise: Molecular Mass of Freon

1.1.3.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169955Answer
137.368 amu
Unlike molecules, which form covalent bonds, ionic com pounds do not have a readily identifiable molecular unit. Therefore, for
ionic compounds, the formula mass (also called the e mpirical formula mass) of the compound is used instea d of the molecular
mass. The formula mass is the sum of the atomic masses of all the elements in the empirical formula, each multiplied by its
subscript (written or implied). It is directly analog ous to the molecular mass of a covalent compound. The units are atomic mass
units.
Calculate the formula mass of Ca (PO), commonly called calcium phosphate. This compound is the principal sour ce of
calcium found in bovine milk.
Given: ionic compound
Asked for: formula mass
Strategy:
A. Determine the number of atoms of each element in the e mpirical formula.
B. Obtain the atomic masses of each element from the peri odic table and multiply the atomic mass of each element by the
number of atoms of that element.
C. Add together the masses to give the formula mass.
Solution:
A The empirical formula—Ca (PO) —indicates that the sim plest electrically neutral unit of calcium phosphate contains three
Ca ions and two PO ions. The formula mass of this molec ular unit is calculated by adding together the atom ic masses of
three calcium atoms, two phosphorus atoms, and eight oxy gen atoms.
B Taking atomic masses from the periodic table, we obtain
C Adding together the masses gives the formula mass of Ca (PO):
Calculate the formula mass of, commonly called sili con nitride. It is an extremely hard and inert materi al that is used to
make cutting tools for machining hard metal alloys.
Answer
The Mole
Dalton’s theory that each chemical compound has a par ticular combination of atoms and that the ratios of the numbers of atoms of
the elements present are usually small whole numbers. It also describes the law of multiple proportions, which s tates that the ratios
of the masses of elements that form a series of compo unds are small whole numbers. The problem for Dalton a nd other earlyExample: Formula Mass of Calcium Phosphate
3 4 2
3 4 2
2+43−
3 4 2
Exercise: Formula Mass of Silicon Nitride

1.1.3.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169955chemists was to discover the quantitative relationshi p between the number of atoms in a chemical substance and its mass. Because
the masses of individual atoms are so minuscule (on the order of 10 g/atom), chemists do not measure the mass of individual
atoms or molecules. In the laboratory, for example, th e masses of compounds and elements used by chemists t ypically range from
milligrams to grams, while in industry, chemicals are bo ught and sold in kilograms and tons. To analyze the tr ansformations that
occur between individual atoms or molecules in a che mical reaction, it is therefore essential for chemist s to know how many atoms
or molecules are contained in a measurable quantity in the laboratory—a given mass of sample. The unit t hat provides this link is
the mole (mol), from the Latin moles, meaning “pile” or “heap.”
Many familiar items are sold in numerical quantities with distinct names. For example, cans of soda come in a six-pack, eggs are
sold by the dozen (12), and pencils often come in a gross (12 dozen, or 144). Sheets of printer paper are packaged in reams of 500,
a seemingly large number. Atoms are so small, however, th at even 500 atoms are too small to see or measure by most common
techniques. Any readily measurable mass of an element or compound contains an extraordinarily large number of atoms,
molecules, or ions, so an extremely large numerical uni t is needed to count them. The mole is used for this purpose.
A mole is defined as the amount of a substance that contains the number of carbon atoms in exactly 12 g of isotopically pure
carbon-12. According to the most recent experimental measurements, this mass of carbon-12 contains 6.0221 42 × 10 atoms, but
for most purposes 6.022 × 10 provides an adequate nu mber of significant figures. Just as 1 mole of atom s contains 6.022 × 10
atoms, 1 mole of eggs contains 6.022 × 10 eggs. This n umber is called Avogadro’s number, after the 19th-ce ntury Italian scientist
who first proposed a relationship between the volumes of g ases and the numbers of particles they contain.
It is not obvious why eggs come in dozens rather than 10s or 14s, or why a ream of paper contains 500 sheet s rather than 400 or
600. The definition of a mole—that is, the decision to base it on 12 g of carbon-12—is also arbitrary. Th e important point is that 1
mole of carbon—or of anything else, whether atoms, comp act discs, or houses—always has the same number of objec ts: 6.022 ×
10.
To appreciate the magnitude of Avogadro’s number, co nsider a mole of pennies. Stacked vertically, a mole of pennies would be 4.5
× 10 mi high, or almost six times the diameter of the Milky Way galaxy. If a mole of pennies were distribut ed equally among the
entire population on Earth, each person would have mo re than one trillion dollars. The mole is so large that it is useful only for
measuring very small objects, such as atoms.
The concept of the mole allows scientists to count a specific number of individual atoms and molecules b y weighing measurable
quantities of elements and compounds. To obtain 1 mol of carbon-12 atoms, one weighs out 12 g of isotopical ly pure carbon-12.
Because each element has a different atomic mass, howev er, a mole of each element has a different mass, ev en though it contains
the same number of atoms (6.022 × 10). This is analog ous to the fact that a dozen extra large eggs weighs m ore than a dozen
small eggs, or that the total weight of 50 adult human s is greater than the total weight of 50 children. B ecause of the way the mole
is defined, for every element the number of grams in a mole is the same as the number of atomic mass units in the atomic mass of
the element. For example, the mass of 1 mol of magne sium (atomic mass = 24.305 amu) is 24.305 g. Because t he atomic mass of
magnesium (24.305 amu) is slightly more than twice t hat of a carbon-12 atom (12 amu), the mass of 1 mol o f magnesium atoms
(24.305 g) is slightly more than twice that of 1 mol of carbon-12 (12 g). Similarly, the mass of 1 mol of he lium (atomic mass =
4.002602 amu) is 4.002602 g, which is about one-third that of 1 mol of carbon-12. Using the concept of the mole, Dalton’s theory
can be restated: 1 mol of a compound is formed by c ombining elements in amounts whose mole ratios are smal l whole numbers.
For example, 1 mol of water (H O) has 2 mol of hydrogen atoms a nd 1 mol of oxygen atoms.
Molar Mass
The molar mass of a substance is defined as the mass in grams of 1 mole of that substance. One mole of iso topically pure carbon12 has a mass of 12 g. For an element, the molar mass i s the mass of 1 mol of atoms of that element; for a covalent molecular
compound, it is the mass of 1 mol of molecules of tha t compound; for an ionic compound, it is the mass of 1 mol of formula units.
That is, the molar mass of a substance is the mass (in grams per mole) of 6.022 × 10 atoms, molecules, or formula units of that
substance. In each case, the number of grams in 1 mol is the same as the number of atomic mass units that de scribe the atomic
mass, the molecular mass, or the formula mass, respectively.
The periodic table lists the atomic mass of carbon as 12.011 amu; the average molar mass of carbon—the mass of 6.022 × 10
carbon atoms—is therefore 12.011 g/mol:−23
23 23

1.1.3.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169955Substance (formula)Atomic, Molecular, or Formula Mass
(amu)Molar Mass (g/mol)
carbon (C) 12.011 (atomic mass) 12.011
ethanol (C H OH) 46.069 (molecular mass) 46.069
calcium phosphate [Ca (PO)] 310.177 (formula mass) 310.177
The molar mass of naturally-occurring carbon is diff erent from that of carbon-12, and is not an integer because carbon occurs as a
mixture of carbon-12, carbon-13, and carbon-14. One mo le of carbon still has 6.022 × 10 carbon atoms, but 98.89% of those
atoms are carbon-12, 1.11% are carbon-13, and a trace (about 1 atom in 1012) are carbon-14. (For more info rmation, see Section
1.6 "Isotopes and Atomic Masses".) Similarly, the molar m ass of uranium is 238.03 g/mol, and the molar mass of iodine is 126.90
g/mol. When dealing with elements such as iodine and s ulfur, which occur as a diatomic molecule (I) and a p olyatomic molecule
(S), respectively, molar mass usually refers to the mass of 1 mol of atoms of the element—in this case I a nd S, not to the mass of 1
mol of molecules of the element (I and S).
The molar mass of ethanol is the mass of ethanol (C H OH) that contains 6.022 × 10 ethanol molecules. As in Ex ample,
the molecular mass of ethanol is 46.069 amu. Becaus e 1 mol of ethanol contains 2 mol of carbon atoms (2 × 12.011 g), 6 mol of
hydrogen atoms (6 × 1.0079 g), and 1 mol of oxygen atoms (1 × 15.9994 g), its molar mass is 46.069 g/mol. Si milarly, the formula
mass of calcium phosphate [Ca (PO)] is 310.177 amu, so i ts molar mass is 310.177 g/mol. This is the mass of calc ium phosphate
that contains 6.022 × 10 formula units.
The mole is the basis of quantitative chemistry. It p rovides chemists with a way to convert easily between the mass of a substance
and the number of individual atoms, molecules, or form ula units of that substance. Conversely, it enables ch emists to calculate the
mass of a substance needed to obtain a desired number of atoms, molecules, or formula units. For example, t o convert moles of a
substance to mass, the following relationship is used:
or, more specifically,
Conversely, to convert the mass of a substance to moles:
The coefficients in a balanced chemical equation ca n be interpreted both as the relative numbers of mole cules involved in the
reaction and as the relative number of moles. For exampl e, in the balanced equation:
the production of two moles of water would require the consumption of 2 moles of and one mole of. Therefo re, when
considering this particular reaction
2 moles of H
1 mole of O and
2 moles of H O
would be considered to be stoichiometrically equivalent quantitites.
These stoichiometric relationships, derived from balanc ed equations, can be used to determine expected amoun ts of products given
amounts of reactants. For example, how many moles of would be produced from 1.57 moles of?2 5
3 4 2
2 8
2 523
3 4 2

1.1.3.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169955The ratio is the stoichiometric relationship between and from the balanced equation for this reaction.
For the combustion of butane () the balanced equation is:
Calculate the mass of that is produced in burning 1.00 gra m of.
Solution
Thus, the overall sequence of steps to solve this problem is:
First of all we need to calculate how many moles of butane we have in a 1.00 gram sample:
Now, the stoichiometric relationship between and is:
Therefore:
The question called for the determination of the mas s of produced, thus we have to convert moles of into g rams (by
using the molecular weight of):
Be sure to pay attention to the units when convertin g between mass and moles. Figure is a flowchart for c onverting between
mass; the number of moles; and the number of atoms, m olecules, or formula units. The use of these conver sions is illustrated in
Examples and.
Example: Combustion of Butane

1.1.3.6 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169955Figure: A Flowchart for Converting between Mass; the Number of Moles; and the Number of Atoms, Molecules, or Formula
Units
For 35.00 g of ethylene glycol (HOCH CH OH), which is used in ink s for ballpoint pens, calculate the number of
a. moles.
b. molecules.
Given: mass and molecular formula
Asked for: number of moles and number of molecules
Strategy:
A. Use the molecular formula of the compound to calculat e its molecular mass in grams per mole.
B. Convert from mass to moles by dividing the mass given b y the compound’s molar mass.
C. Convert from moles to molecules by multiplying th e number of moles by Avogadro’s number.
Solution:
A The molecular mass of ethylene glycol can be calcu lated from its molecular formula using the method il lustrated in Example
: The molar mass of ethylene glycol is 62.068 g/mol.
B The number of moles of ethylene glycol present in 35.00 g can be calculated by dividing the mass (in gr ams) by the molar
mass (in grams per mole):
So
It is always a good idea to estimate the answer before you do the actual calculation. In this case, the ma ss given (35.00 g) is
less than the molar mass, so the answer should be less than 1 mol. The calculated answer (0.5639 mol) is indee d less than 1
mol, so we have probably not made a major error in the calcu lations.
C To calculate the number of molecules in the sample, we mult iply the number of moles by Avogadro’s number:
Because we are dealing with slightly more than 0.5 mol of ethylene glycol, we expect the number of molecule s present to be
slightly more than one-half of Avogadro’s number, or sli ghtly more than 3 × 10 molecules, which is indeed the ca se.
For 75.0 g of CCl F (Freon-11), calculate the number of
a. moles.
b. molecules.
Answer a
0.546 mol
Answer b
3.29 × 10 moleculesExample: Ethylene Glycol
2 2
Exercise: Freon-11

1.1.3.7 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169955Calculate the mass of 1.75 mol of each compound.
a. (common name: sulfur monochloride; systematic name: disulfur dichloride)
b. (calcium hypochlorite)
Given: number of moles and molecular or empirical formula
Asked for: mass
Strategy:
A Calculate the molecular mass of the compound in gra ms from its molecular formula (if covalent) or empir ical formula (if
ionic).
B Convert from moles to mass by multiplying the moles of the compound given by its molar mass.
Solution:
We begin by calculating the molecular mass of and the formula mass of.
A The molar mass of is 135.036 g/mol.
B The mass of 1.75 mol of is calculated as follows:
A The molar mass of Ca(ClO) 142.983 g/mol.
B The mass of 1.75 mol of Ca(ClO) is calculated as follows:
Because 1.75 mol is less than 2 mol, the final quanti ty in grams in both cases should be less than twice the molar mass, which
it is.
Calculate the mass of 0.0122 mol of each compound.
a. Si N (silicon nitride), used as bearings and rollers
b. (CH) N (trimethylamine), a corrosion inhibitor
Answer a
1.71 g
Answer b
0.721 g
The coefficients in a balanced chemical equation ca n be interpreted both as the relative numbers of mole cules involved in the
reaction and as the relative number of moles. For exampl e, in the balanced equation:Example
Exercise
3 4
3 3

1.1.3.8 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169955the production of two moles of water would require the consumption of 2 moles of and one mole of. Therefo re, when
considering this particular reaction
2 moles of H
1 mole of O and
2 moles of H O
would be considered to be stoichiometrically equivalent quantitites.
These stoichiometric relationships, derived from balanc ed equations, can be used to determine expected amoun ts of products given
amounts of reactants. For example, how many moles of would be produced from 1.57 moles of?
The ratio is the stoichiometric relationship between and from the balanced equation for this reaction.
For the combustion of butane () the balanced equation is:
Calculate the mass of that is produced in burning 1.00 gra m of.
Solution
First of all we need to calculate how many moles of butane we have in a 1.00 gram sample:
Now, the stoichiometric relationship between and is:
Therefore:
The question called for the determination of the mas s of produced, thus we have to convert moles of into g rams (by
using the molecular weight of):
Thus, the overall sequence of steps to solve this problem were:
In a similar way we could determine the mass of water produ ced, or oxygen consumed, etc.
Interpreting Chemical Equations (Part 2)
Previously, we discussed that chemical equations give t he relative amounts of reactants and products consumed or produced in a
reaction. This was discussed in terms of the the numbe r of atoms, molecules, or formula units of a reactant or a product. A chemical
equation can also be interpreted interms of moles of a reactant or product. As illustrated below, the coeff icients allow interpreted in
any of the following ways:
Two NH ions and one Cr O ion yield 1 formula unit of Cr O, 1 N molecule, and 4 H O molecules.
One mole of (NH) Cr O yields 1 mol of Cr O, 1 mol of N, and 4 mol of H O.2
Example
4+
2 72−
2 3 2 2
4 2 2 7 2 3 2 2

1.1.3.9 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169955A mass of 252 g of (NH) Cr O yields 152 g of Cr O, 28 g of N, and 7 2 g of H O.
A total of 6.022 × 10 formula units of (NH) Cr O yields 6.022 × 10 formula units of Cr O, 6.022 × 10 molecules of N,
and 24.09 × 10 molecules of H O.
Figure: The Relationships among Moles, Masses, and Formula Uni ts of Compounds in the Balanced Chemical Reaction for
the Ammonium Dichromate V olcano
These are all chemically equivalent ways of stating the information given in the balanced chemical equatio n, using the concepts of
the mole, molar or formula mass, and Avogadro’s number. The ratio of the number of moles of one substance to the number of
moles of another is called the mole ratio. For exampl e, the mole ratio of to in Equation is 4:1. The total mass of
reactants equals the total mass of products, as predicted by Dalton’s law of conservation of mass:
yield
The chemical equation does not, however, show the rate o f the reaction (rapidly, slowly, or not at all) or whet her energy in the form
of heat or light is given off. These issues are consider ed in more detail in later chapters.
An important chemical reaction was analyzed by Antoine Lavoisier, an 18th-century French chemist, who was intere sted in the
chemistry of living organisms as well as simple chemic al systems. In a classic series of experiments, he m easured the carbon
dioxide and heat produced by a guinea pig during re spiration, in which organic compounds are used as fuel to produce energy,
carbon dioxide, and water. Lavoisier found that the r atio of heat produced to carbon dioxide exhaled was si milar to the ratio
observed for the reaction of charcoal with oxygen in the air to produce carbon dioxide—a process chemist s call combustion. Based
on these experiments, he proposed that “Respiration is a combustion, slow it is true, but otherwise perfec tly similar to that of
charcoal.” Lavoisier was correct, although the organ ic compounds consumed in respiration are substantiall y different from those
found in charcoal. One of the most important fuels in the human body is glucose (), which is virtually th e only fuel used in
the brain. Thus combustion and respiration are examples o f chemical reactions.
The balanced chemical equation for the combustion of g lucose in the laboratory (or in the brain) is as follows:
Construct a table showing how to interpret the informat ion in this equation in terms of
a. a single molecule of glucose.
b. moles of reactants and products.
c. grams of reactants and products represented by 1 mol of glucose.
d. numbers of molecules of reactants and products repre sented by 1 mol of glucose.
Given: balanced chemical equation4 2 2 7 2 3 2 2
234 2 2 7232 3232
Example: Combustion of Glucose

1.1.3.10 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169955Asked for: molecule, mole, and mass relationships
Strategy:
A. Use the coefficients from the balanced chemical equat ion to determine both the molecular and mole ratios.
B. Use the molar masses of the reactants and products to convert from moles to grams.
C. Use Avogadro’s number to convert from moles to the nu mber of molecules.
Solution:
This equation is balanced as written: each side has 6 car bon atoms, 18 oxygen atoms, and 12 hydrogen atoms. We c an therefore
use the coefficients directly to obtain the desired info rmation.
a. One molecule of glucose reacts with 6 molecules of O to yield 6 molecules of CO and 6 molecules of H O.
b. One mole of glucose reacts with 6 mol of O to yield 6 mol of CO and 6 mol of H O.
c. To interpret the equation in terms of masses of reac tants and products, we need their molar masses and the mole r atios from
part b. The molar masses in grams per mole are as follows: glucose, 180.16; O, 31.9988; CO, 44.010; and H O, 18.015.
C One mole of glucose contains Avogadro’s number (6.02 2 × 10) of glucose molecules. Thus 6.022 × 10 glucose molecules
react with (6 × 6.022 × 10) = 3.613 × 10 oxygen mole cules to yield (6 × 6.022 × 10) = 3.613 × 10 molecule s each of
CO and H O.
In tabular form:
a. 1 molecule 6 molecules 6 molecules 6 molecules
b. 1 mol 6 mol 6 mol 6 mol
c. 180.16 g 191.9928 g 264.06 g 108.09 g
d.6.022 × 10
molecules 3.613 × 10
molecules 3.613 × 10
molecules 3.613 × 10
molecule
Ammonium nitrate is a common fertilizer, but under th e wrong conditions it can be hazardous. In 1947, a shi p loaded with
ammonium nitrate caught fire during unloading and ex ploded, destroying the town of Texas City, Texas. The ex plosion resulted
from the following reaction:
Construct a table showing how to interpret the informat ion in the equation in terms of
a. individual molecules and ions.
b. moles of reactants and products.
c. grams of reactants and products given 2 mol of ammonium nitrate.
d. numbers of molecules or formula units of reactants and products given 2 mol of ammonium nitrate.
Answer:2 2 2
2 2 2
2 2 2
23 23
23 24 23 24
2 2
23 24 24 24
Exercise: Ammonium Nitrate Explosion

1.1.3.11 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169955 → + +
a.2NH ions
and 2NO
ions 2 molecules 4 molecules 1 molecule
b. 2 mol 2 mol 4 mol 1 mol
c. 160.0864 g 56.0268 g 72.0608 g 31.9988 g
d.1.204 × 10
formula units 1.204 × 10
molecules 2.409 × 10
molecules 6.022 × 10
molecules
Summary
To analyze chemical transformations, it is essential to use a standardized unit of measure called the mole. The molecular mass and
the formula mass of a compound are obtained by addin g together the atomic masses of the atoms present in the molecular formula
or empirical formula, respectively; the units of both are atomic mass units (amu). The mole is a unit used to measure the number of
atoms, molecules, or (in the case of ionic compounds) formula units in a given mass of a substance. The m ole is defined as the
amount of substance that contains the number of carb on atoms in exactly 12 g of carbon-12, Avogadro’s nu mber (6.022 × 10) of
atoms of carbon-12. The molar mass of a substance is def ined as the mass of 1 mol of that substance, expressed in grams per mole,
and is equal to the mass of 6.022 × 10 atoms, molecules, or f ormula units of that substance.
1.1.3: Avogadro's Number and the Mole is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.4+
3−
24 24 24 23

1.1.4.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1699541.1.4: Empirical and Molecular Formulas
To determine the empirical formula of a compound from its composition by mass.
To derive the molecular formula of a compound from its empirical formula.
When a new chemical compound, such as a potential new pharmaceutical, is synthesized in the laboratory or isolated from a natural
source, chemists determine its elemental composition, its empirical formula, and its structure to understa nd its properties. This
section focuses on how to determine the empirical fo rmula of a compound and then use it to determine th e molecular formula if the
molar mass of the compound is known.
Percentage Composition from Formulas
In some types of analyses of it is important to kno w the percentage by mass of each type of element in a compound. The law of
definite proportions states that a chemical compoun d always contains the same proportion of elements by mass; that is, the percent
composition—the percentage of each element present in a pure substance—is constant (although there are exceptions to this law).
Take for example methane () with a Formula and molecula r weight:
the relative (mass) percentages of carbon and hydroge n are
A more complex example is sucrose (table sugar) is 42.11% carbon, 6.48% hydrogen, and 51.41% oxygen by m ass. This means
that 100.00 g of sucrose always contains 42.11 g of ca rbon, 6.48 g of hydrogen, and 51.41 g of oxygen. First th e molecular formula
of sucrose (C H O) is used to calculate the mass perce ntage of the component elements; the mass percentage can then be used
to determine an empirical formula.
According to its molecular formula, each molecule of sucrose contains 12 carbon atoms, 22 hydrogen atoms, and 11 oxygen atoms.
A mole of sucrose molecules therefore contains 12 mol of carbon atoms, 22 mol of hydrogen atoms, and 11 m ol of oxygen atoms.
This information can be used to calculate the mass of each element in 1 mol of sucrose, which gives the molar mass of sucrose.
These masses can then be used to calculate the percent composition of sucrose. To three decimal places, the c alculations are the
following:
Thus 1 mol of sucrose has a mass of 342.297 g; note that more than half of the mass (175.989 g) is oxyg en, and almost half of the
mass (144.132 g) is carbon.
The mass percentage of each element in sucrose is th e mass of the element present in 1 mol of sucrose di vided by the molar mass
of sucrose, multiplied by 100 to give a percentage. The result is shown to two decimal places:Learning Objectives
12 22 11

1.1.4.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169954This can be checked by verifying that the sum of the percent ages of all the elements in the compound is 100%:
If the sum is not 100%, an error has been made in calc ulations. (Rounding to the correct number of decimal places can, however,
cause the total to be slightly different from 100%.) Thus 100.00 g of sucrose contains 42.12 g of carbon, 6.48 g of hydrogen, and
51.41 g of oxygen; to two decimal places, the percen t composition of sucrose is indeed 42.12% carbon, 6.48 % hydrogen, and
51.41% oxygen.
Figure: Percent and absolute composition of sucrose
It is also possible to calculate mass percentages using atomic masses and molecular masses, with atomic mass uni ts. Because the
answer is a ratio, expressed as a percentage, the unit s of mass cancel whether they are grams (using molar m asses) or atomic mass
units (using atomic and molecular masses).
Aspartame is the artificial sweetener sold as NutraSweet and E qual. Its molecular formula is C H N O.
a. Calculate the mass percentage of each element in aspart ame.
b. Calculate the mass of carbon in a 1.00 g packet of Equa l, assuming it is pure aspartame.
Given: molecular formula and mass of sampleExample: NutraSweet
14 18 2 5

1.1.4.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169954Asked for: mass percentage of all elements and mass of one elemen t in sample
Strategy:
A. Use atomic masses from the periodic table to calculate t he molar mass of aspartame.
B. Divide the mass of each element by the molar mass of as partame; then multiply by 100 to obtain percentages.
C. To find the mass of an element contained in a given mass of aspartame, multiply the mass of aspartame by the mass
percentage of that element, expressed as a decimal.
Solution:
a.
A We calculate the mass of each element in 1 mol of asparta me and the molar mass of aspartame, here to three decimal places:
B To calculate the mass percentage of each element, we divide the mass of each element in the compound b y the molar mass of
aspartame and then multiply by 100 to obtain percentag es, here reported to two decimal places:
As a check, we can add the percentages together:
If you obtain a total that differs from 100% by more than ab out ±1%, there must be an error somewhere in the calcula tion.
b. C The mass of carbon in 1.00 g of aspartame is calculated as follows:
Calculate the mass percentage of each element in alu minum oxide (Al O). Then calculate the mass of aluminu m in a 3.62 g
sample of pure aluminum oxide.
Answer
52.93% aluminum; 47.08% oxygen; 1.92 g Al
Determining the Empirical Formula of Penicillin
Just as the empirical formula of a substance can be u sed to determine its percent composition, the perce nt composition of a sample
can be used to determine its empirical formula, whic h can then be used to determine its molecular formu la. Such a procedure was
actually used to determine the empirical and molecular for mulas of the first antibiotic to be discovered: penicill in.
Antibiotics are chemical compounds that selectively kil l microorganisms, many of which cause diseases. Although a ntibiotics are
often taken for granted today, penicillin was discove red only about 80 years ago. The subsequent developme nt of a wide array of
other antibiotics for treating many common diseases has contributed greatly to the substantial increase i n life expectancy over the
past 50 years. The discovery of penicillin is a his torical detective story in which the use of mass perce ntages to determine empirical
formulas played a key role.Exercise: Aluminum Oxide
2 3

1.1.4.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169954In 1928, Alexander Fleming, a young microbiologist at th e University of London, was working with a common bacteri um that
causes boils and other infections such as blood poisoni ng. For laboratory study, bacteria are commonly grown o n the surface of a
nutrient-containing gel in small, flat culture dishes. One day Fleming noticed that one of his cultures was c ontaminated by a bluishgreen mold similar to the mold found on spoiled brea d or fruit. Such accidents are rather common, and mo st laboratory workers
would have simply thrown the cultures away. Fleming noti ced, however, that the bacteria were growing everywhere on the gel
except near the contaminating mold (part (a) in Figu re), and he hypothesized that the mold must be prod ucing a substance
that either killed the bacteria or prevented their growth. To test this hypothesis, he grew the mold in a liquid and then filtered the
liquid and added it to various bacteria cultures. The liquid killed not only the bacteria Fleming had ori ginally been studying but also
a wide range of other disease-causing bacteria. Beca use the mold was a member of the Penicillium family (n amed for their pencilshaped branches under the microscope) (part (b) in Figu re), Fleming called the active ingredient in the broth p enicillin.
Figure: Penicillium. (a) Penicillium mold is growing in a culture dish; the photo shows its effect on bacterial growt h. (b) In
this photomicrograph of Penicillium, its rod- and pencil-sh aped branches are visible. The name comes from the Latin penicillus,
meaning “paintbrush.”
Although Fleming was unable to isolate penicillin in p ure form, the medical importance of his discovery s timulated researchers in
other laboratories. Finally, in 1940, two chemists at Oxf ord University, Howard Florey (1898–1968) and Ernst Cha in (1906–1979),
were able to isolate an active product, which they cal led penicillin G. Within three years, penicillin G was i n widespread use for
treating pneumonia, gangrene, gonorrhea, and other di seases, and its use greatly increased the survival ra te of wounded soldiers in
World War II. As a result of their work, Fleming, Florey, an d Chain shared the Nobel Prize in Medicine in 1945.
As soon as they had succeeded in isolating pure penic illin G, Florey and Chain subjected the compound to a procedure called
combustion analysis (described later in this section) to determine what elements were present and in what qua ntities. The results of
such analyses are usually reported as mass percentages. They discovered that a typical sample of penicill in G contains 53.9%
carbon, 4.8% hydrogen, 7.9% nitrogen, 9.0% sulfur, and 6.5% sodium by mass. The sum of these numbers is onl y 82.1%, rather
than 100.0%, which implies that there must be one or m ore additional elements. A reasonable candidate is ox ygen, which is a
common component of compounds that contain carbon an d hydrogen; do not assume that the “missing” mass is a lways due to
oxygen. It could be any other element. For technical r easons, however, it is difficult to analyze for oxygen d irectly. Assuming that
all the missing mass is due to oxygen, then penicilli n G contains (100.0% − 82.1%) = 17.9% oxygen. From these mass percentages,
the empirical formula and eventually the molecular for mula of the compound can be determined.
To determine the empirical formula from the mass pe rcentages of the elements in a compound such as penic illin G, the mass
percentages must be converted to relative numbers o f atoms. For convenience, assume a 100.0 g sample of t he compound, even
though the sizes of samples used for analyses are genera lly much smaller, usually in milligrams. This assumption simplifies the
arithmetic because a 53.9% mass percentage of carbon c orresponds to 53.9 g of carbon in a 100.0 g sample of penicillin G;
likewise, 4.8% hydrogen corresponds to 4.8 g of hydrog en in 100.0 g of penicillin G; and so forth for the o ther elements. Each
mass is then divided by the molar mass of the element to determine how many moles of each element are pres ent in the 100.0 g
sample:

1.1.4.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169954Thus 100.0 g of penicillin G contains 4.49 mol of car bon, 4.8 mol of hydrogen, 0.56 mol of nitrogen, 0.28 m ol of sulfur, 0.28 mol
of sodium, and 1.12 mol of oxygen (assuming that all the missing mass was oxygen). The number of signific ant figures in the
numbers of moles of elements varies between two and th ree because some of the analytical data were reported to only two
significant figures.
These results give the ratios of the moles of the vari ous elements in the sample (4.49 mol of carbon to 4.8 mol of hydrogen to 0.56
mol of nitrogen, and so forth), but they are not the whole-number ratios needed for the empirical formul a—the empirical formula
expresses the relative numbers of atoms in the small est whole numbers possible. To obtain whole numbers, d ivide the numbers of
moles of all the elements in the sample by the numbe r of moles of the element present in the lowest relati ve amount, which in this
example is sulfur or sodium. The results will be the sub scripts of the elements in the empirical formula. To two significant figures,
the results are as follows:
The empirical formula of penicillin G is therefore C H N NaO S. Other experiments have shown that penicillin G is actually an
ionic compound that contains Na cations and [C H N O S] a nions in a 1:1 ratio. The complex structure of penic illin G (Figure
) was not determined until 1948.
Figure: Structural Formula and Ball-and-Stick Model o f the Anion of Penicillin G
In some cases, one or more of the subscripts in a for mula calculated using this procedure may not be inte gers. Does this mean that
the compound of interest contains a nonintegral numb er of atoms? No; rounding errors in the calculations as well as experimental
errors in the data can result in nonintegral ratios. W hen this happens, judgment must be exercised in inte rpreting the results, as16 17 2 4
+16 17 2 4−

1.1.4.6 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169954illustrated in Example 6. In particular, ratios of 1.5 0, 1.33, or 1.25 suggest that you should multiply al l subscripts in the formula by
2, 3, or 4, respectively. Only if the ratio is within 5% of a n integral value should one consider rounding to the neare st integer.
Calculate the empirical formula of the ionic compou nd calcium phosphate, a major component of fertilize r and a polishing
agent in toothpastes. Elemental analysis indicates that it contains 38.77% calcium, 19.97% phosphorus, and 41.27% o xygen.
Given: percent composition
Asked for: empirical formula
Strategy:
A. Assume a 100 g sample and calculate the number of moles of each element in that sample.
B. Obtain the relative numbers of atoms of each element in the compound by dividing the number of moles of each el ement in
the 100 g sample by the number of moles of the element p resent in the smallest amount.
C. If the ratios are not integers, multiply all subscript s by the same number to give integral values.
D. Because this is an ionic compound, identify the anion an d cation and write the formula so that the charges balan ce.
Solution:
A A 100 g sample of calcium phosphate contains 38.77 g of calcium, 19.97 g of phosphorus, and 41.27 g of oxygen. Dividing
the mass of each element in the 100 g sample by its mol ar mass gives the number of moles of each element in the sa mple:
B To obtain the relative numbers of atoms of each ele ment in the compound, divide the number of moles of each element in the
100-g sample by the number of moles of the element in the smallest amount, in this case phosphorus:
C We could write the empirical formula of calcium pho sphate as Ca P O, but the empirical formula should sho w the
ratios of the elements as small whole numbers. To co nvert the result to integral form, multiply all the s ubscripts by 2 to get
Ca P O. The deviation from integral atomic ratios is small and can be attributed to minor experimental er rors;
therefore, the empirical formula is Ca P O.
D The calcium ion (Ca) is a cation, so to maintain el ectrical neutrality, phosphorus and oxygen must form a polyatomic
anion. We know from Chapter 2 "Molecules, Ions, and Ch emical Formulas" that phosphorus and oxygen form the p hosphate
ion (PO; see Table 2.4). Because there are two phosphor us atoms in the empirical formula, two phosphate ion s must be
present. So we write the formula of calcium phosphate as Ca (PO).
Calculate the empirical formula of ammonium nitrate, an ionic compound that contains 35.00% nitrogen, 5.04 % hydrogen, and
59.96% oxygen by mass. Although ammonium nitrate is widely u sed as a fertilizer, it can be dangerously explosive.
Answer
N H O is NH NO, written as NH NOExample: Calcium Phosphate in Toothpaste
1.501 1.000 4.002
3.002 2.000 8.004
3 2 8
2+
43−
3 4 2
Exercise: Ammonium Nitrate
2 4 3 4+
3−
4 3

1.1.4.7 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169954From Empirical Formula to Molecular Formula
The empirical formula gives only the relative numbe rs of atoms in a substance in the smallest possible ratio. For a covalent
substance, chemists are usually more interested in t he molecular formula, which gives the actual number of atoms of each kind
present per molecule. Without additional informatio n, however, it is impossible to know whether the formula of penicillin G, for
example, is C H N NaO S or an integral multiple, such as C H N Na O S, C H N Na O S, or (C H N NaO S),
where n is an integer. (The actual structure of penicillin G is shown in Figure).
Consider glucose, the sugar that circulates in our b lood to provide fuel for the body and brain. Result s from combustion analysis of
glucose report that glucose contains 39.68% carbon and 6.58% hydrogen. Because combustion occurs in the pre sence of oxygen, it
is impossible to directly determine the percentage o f oxygen in a compound by using combustion analysis; other more complex
methods are necessary. Assuming that the remaining pe rcentage is due to oxygen, then glucose would contain 53.79% oxygen. A
100.0 g sample of glucose would therefore contain 39.68 g of carbon, 6.58 g of hydrogen, and 53.79 g of oxy gen. To calculate the
number of moles of each element in the 100.0 g sample, divi de the mass of each element by its molar mass:
Once again, the subscripts of the elements in the empir ical formula are found by dividing the number of mo les of each element by
the number of moles of the element present in the smallest a mount:
The oxygen:carbon ratio is 1.018, or approximately 1, and the hydrogen:carbon ratio is approximately 2. The empirical formula of
glucose is therefore CH O, but what is its molecular formula?
Many known compounds have the empirical formula CH O, i ncluding formaldehyde, which is used to preserve biologi cal
specimens and has properties that are very different from the sugar circulating in the blood. At this poin t, it cannot be known
whether glucose is CH O, C H O, or any other (CH O). However, the experimentally determined molar mass of glucose (180
g/mol) can be used to resolve this dilemma.
First, calculate the formula mass, the molar mass of the formula unit, which is the sum of the atomic masses of the elements in the
empirical formula multiplied by their respective subscri pts. For glucose,
This is much smaller than the observed molar mass of 180 g/mol.
Second, determine the number of formula units per mol e. For glucose, calculate the number of (CH O) units—tha t is, the n in
(CH O) —by dividing the molar mass of glucose by the formul a mass of CH O:
Each glucose contains six CH O formula units, which giv es a molecular formula for glucose of (CH O), which is more commonly
written as C H O. The molecular structures of formalde hyde and glucose, both of which have the empirical for mula CH O, are
shown in Figure.16 17 2 4 32 34 4 2 8 2 48 51 6 3 12 3 16 17 2 4 n
2 2 4 2 2 n
2 n 2
2 2 6
6 12 6 2

1.1.4.8 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169954
Figure: Structural Formulas and Ball-and-Stick Models of (a) Formaldehyde and (b) Glucose
Calculate the molecular formula of caffeine, a compo und found in coffee, tea, and cola drinks that has a m arked stimulatory
effect on mammals. The chemical analysis of caffeine shows that it contains 49.18% carbon, 5.39% hydrogen, 28.65%
nitrogen, and 16.68% oxygen by mass, and its experimental ly determined molar mass is 196 g/mol.
Given: percent composition and molar mass
Asked for: molecular formula
Strategy:
A. Assume 100 g of caffeine. From the percentages given, use t he procedure given in Example 6 to calculate the empiri cal
formula of caffeine.
B. Calculate the formula mass and then divide the expe rimentally determined molar mass by the formula mass. Th is gives the
number of formula units present.
C. Multiply each subscript in the empirical formula by t he number of formula units to give the molecular formul a.
Solution:
A We begin by dividing the mass of each element in 1 00.0 g of caffeine (49.18 g of carbon, 5.39 g of hydro gen, 28.65 g of
nitrogen, 16.68 g of oxygen) by its molar mass. This gives t he number of moles of each element in 100 g of caffeine.
To obtain the relative numbers of atoms of each elem ent present, divide the number of moles of each elemen t by the number of
moles of the element present in the least amount:
These results are fairly typical of actual experimen tal data. None of the atomic ratios is exactly integr al but all are within 5% of
integral values. Just as in Example 6, it is reasonable to assume tha t such small deviations from integral values are due to minor
experimental errors, so round to the nearest integer. The empirical formula of caffeine is thus C H N O.
B The molecular formula of caffeine could be C H N O, bu t it could also be any integral multiple of this. T o determine the
actual molecular formula, we must divide the experime ntally determined molar mass by the formula mass. Th e formula mass is
calculated as follows:Example: Caffeine
4 5 2
4 5 2

1.1.4.9 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169954Dividing the measured molar mass of caffeine (196 g/mol) by the calculated formula mass gives
C There are two C H N O formula units in caffeine, so the molecular formula must be (C H N O) = C H N O. The
structure of caffeine is as follows:
Calculate the molecular formula of Freon-114, which h as 13.85% carbon, 41.89% chlorine, and 44.06% fluorine. The
experimentally measured molar mass of this compound is 171 g/mol. Like Freon-11, Freon-114 is a commonly use d refrigerant
that has been implicated in the destruction of the ozon e layer.
Answer
Summary
The empirical formula of a substance can be calculat ed from its percent composition, and the molecular fo rmula can be determined
from the empirical formula and the compound’s molar mass. The empirical formula of a substance can be cal culated from the
experimentally determined percent composition, the percentage of each element present in a pure substa nce by mass. In many4 5 2 4 5 2 2 8 10 4 2
Exercise: Freon-114

1.1.4.10 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169954cases, these percentages can be determined by combusti on analysis. If the molar mass of the compound is k nown, the molecular
formula can be determined from the empirical formula.
1.1.4: Empirical and Molecular Formulas is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1.1.5.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1699561.1.5: Empirical Formulas from Analysis
To understand the definition and difference between emp irical formulas and molecular formulas
To understand how combustion analysis can be used to ide ntify molecular formulas
Molecular formulas tell you how many atoms of each ele ment are in a compound, and empirical formulas tell you the simplest or
most reduced ratio of elements in a compound. If a co mpound's molecular formula cannot be reduced any mo re, then the empirical
formula is the same as the molecular formula. Combust ion analysis can determine the empirical formula of a compound, but cannot
determine the molecular formula (other techniques c an though). Once known, the molecular formula can be ca lculated from the
empirical formula.

Molecular Formula from Empirical Formula
The chemical formula for a compound obtained by com position analysis is always the empirical formula. We can obtain the
chemical formula from the empirical formula if we kn ow the molecular weight of the compound. The chemical formula will always
be some integer multiple of the empirical formula (i.e. integer multiples of the subscripts of the empirical formula). The genera l
flow for this approach is shown in Figure and demonstrated in Example.
Figure: The general flow chart for solving empirical formulas f rom known mass percentages.
Vitamin C (ascorbic acid) contains 40.92 % C, 4.58 % H, and 54.50 % O, by mass. The experimentally determine d molecular
mass is 176 amu. What is the empirical and chemical formul a for ascorbic acid?
Solution
Consider an arbitrary amount of 100 grams of ascorbic ac id, so we would have:
40.92 grams C
4.58 grams H
54.50 grams O
This would give us how many moles of each element?
Carbon
HydrogenLearning Objectives
Example: Ascorbic Acid

1.1.5.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169956Oxygen
Determine the simplest whole number ratio by dividing by the smallest molar amount (3.406 moles in this case - see oxygen):
Carbon
Hydrogen
Oxygen
The relative molar amounts of carbon and oxygen app ear to be equal, but the relative molar amount of hy drogen is higher.
Since we cannot have "fractional" atoms in a compound, we need to normalize the relative amount of hydroge n to be equal to
an integer. 1.333 would appear to be 1 and 1/3, so if we multiply the relative amounts of each atom by '3', we should be able to
get integer values for each atom.
C = (1.0)*3 = 3
H = (1.333)*3 = 4
O = (1.0)*3 = 3
or
C H O
This is our empirical formula for ascorbic acid.
What about the chemical formula? We are told that t he experimentally determined molecular mass is 176 amu. What is the
molecular mass of our empirical formula?
(3*12.011) + (4*1.008) + (3*15.999) = 88.062 amu
The molecular mass from our empirical formula is sign ificantly lower than the experimentally determined v alue. What is the
ratio between the two values?
(176 amu/88.062 amu) = 2.0
Thus, it would appear that our empirical formula is ess entially one half the mass of the actual molecular m ass. If we multiplied
our empirical formula by '2', then the molecular mass woul d be correct. Thus, the actual molecular formula is:
2* C H O = C H O
Combustion Analysis
When a compound containing carbon and hydrogen is sub ject to combustion with oxygen in a special combusti on apparatus all the
carbon is converted to CO and the hydrogen to H O (Figu re). The amount of carbon produced can be determine d by
measuring the amount of CO produced. This is trapped by the sodium hydroxide, and thus we can monitor the mass of CO
produced by determining the increase in mass of the CO trap. Likewise, we can determine the amount of H pro duced by the
amount of H O trapped by the magnesium perchlorate.3 4 3
3 4 3 6 8 6
2 2
2 2

1.1.5.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169956
Figure: Combustion analysis apparatus
One of the most common ways to determine the elemental composition of an unknown hydrocarbon is an analyti cal procedure
called combustion analysis. A small, carefully weighe d sample of an unknown compound that may contain car bon, hydrogen,
nitrogen, and/or sulfur is burned in an oxygen atmosphere,Other elements, such as metals, can be determined by other methods. and
the quantities of the resulting gaseous products (CO, H O, N, and SO, respectively) are determined by one of several possible
methods. One procedure used in combustion analysis is outlined schematically in Figure and a typical combu stion analysis
is illustrated in Examples and.
Figure: Steps for Obtaining an Empirical Formula from Combustion Analysis
What is the empirical formulate for isopropyl alcohol (which contains only C, H and O) if the combustion of a 0.255 grams
isopropyl alcohol sample produces 0.561 grams of CO and 0.306 grams of H O?
Solution
From this information quantitate the amount of C and H in the sample.2 2 2 2
Example: Combustion of Isopropyl Alcohol
2 2

1.1.5.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169956Since one mole of CO is made up of one mole of C and two moles of O, if we have 0.0128 moles of CO in our sam ple, then
we know we have 0.0128 moles of C in the sample. How many grams of C i s this?
How about the hydrogen?
Since one mole of H O is made up of one mole of oxygen and two moles of hydrogen, if we have 0.017 moles of H O, then we
have 2*(0.017) = 0.034 moles of hydrogen. Since hydroge n is about 1 gram/mole, we must have 0.034 grams of hydrogen in
our original sample.
When we add our carbon and hydrogen together we get:
0.154 grams (C) + 0.034 grams (H) = 0.188 grams
But we know we combusted 0.255 grams of isopropyl alcohol. The 'missing' mass must be from the oxygen atoms in the
isopropyl alcohol:
0.255 grams - 0.188 grams = 0.067 grams oxygen
This much oxygen is how many moles?
Overall therefore, we have:
0.0128 moles Carbon
0.0340 moles Hydrogen
0.0042 moles Oxygen
Divide by the smallest molar amount to normalize:
C = 3.05 atoms
H = 8.1 atoms
O = 1 atom
Within experimental error, the most likely empirical for mula for propanol would be
Naphthalene, the active ingredient in one variety of mothballs, is an organic compound that contains car bon and hydrogen only.
Complete combustion of a 20.10 mg sample of naphthal ene in oxygen yielded 69.00 mg of CO and 11.30 mg of H O.
Determine the empirical formula of naphthalene.
Given: mass of sample and mass of combustion products
Asked for: empirical formula
Strategy:
A. Use the masses and molar masses of the combustion products, C O and H O, to calculate the masses of carbon and
hydrogen present in the original sample of naphthalene.
B. Use those masses and the molar masses of the elements to calcu late the empirical formula of naphthalene.
Solution:2 2
2 2
Example: Combustion of Naphalene
2 2
2 2

1.1.5.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169956A Upon combustion, 1 mol of is produced for each mole of carbon atoms in the original sample. Similarly, 1 mol of H O
is produced for every 2 mol of hydrogen atoms prese nt in the sample. The masses of carbon and hydrogen i n the original
sample can be calculated from these ratios, the mass es of CO and H O, and their molar masses. Because the units of molar
mass are grams per mole, we must first convert the masses fr om milligrams to grams:
B To obtain the relative numbers of atoms of both el ements present, we need to calculate the number of mo les of each and
divide by the number of moles of the element present in th e smallest amount:
Dividing each number by the number of moles of the elemen t present in the smaller amount gives
Thus naphthalene contains a 1.25:1 ratio of moles of carbon to moles of hydrogen: C H. Because the ratios of the
elements in the empirical formula must be expressed as small whole numbers, multiply both subscripts by 4, wh ich gives C H
as the empirical formula of naphthalene. In fact, t he molecular formula of naphthalene is C H, which is consistent with our
results.
a. Xylene, an organic compound that is a major component o f many gasoline blends, contains carbon and hydrogen only.
Complete combustion of a 17.12 mg sample of xylene in o xygen yielded 56.77 mg of CO and 14.53 mg of H O.
Determine the empirical formula of xylene.
b. The empirical formula of benzene is CH (its molecular f ormula is C H). If 10.00 mg of benzene is subjected to
combustion analysis, what mass of CO and H O will be produced?
c. Formaldehyde is unstable as a pure gas, readily formin g a mixture of a substance called trioxane and a polymer called
paraformaldehyde. That is why formaldehyde is dissolved i n a solvent, such as water, before it is sold and used. The
molecular formula of trioxane, which contains carbon, hydr ogen, and oxygen, can be determined using the data from two
different experiments. In the first experiment, 17.471 g of trioxane is burned in the apparatus shown above, and 10. 477 g
H O and 25.612 g CO are formed. In the second experiment, th e molecular mass of trioxane is found to be 90.079.
Determine the empirical and molecular formulas for tio xane.
d. Dianabol is one of the anabolic steroids that has been use d by some athletes to increase the size and strength of their
muscles. It is similar to the male hormone testosterone. Some studies indicate that the desired effects of the d rug are
minimal, and the side effects, which include sterility an d increased risk of liver cancer and heart disease, keep most people
from using it. The molecular formula of Dianabol, which con sists of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen, can be determined
using the data from two different experiments. In the first experiment, 14.765 g of Dianabol is burned, and 43.257 g CO2
and 12.395 g H2O are formed. In the second experiment, the mol ecular mass of Dianabol is found to be 300.44. What is
the molecular formula for Dianabol?2
2 2
1.25 1.0
5 4
10 8
Exercises
2 2
6 6
2 2
2 2

1.1.5.6 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169956Answer a
The empirical formula is C H.
Answer b
33.81 mg of CO; 6.92 mg of H O
Answer c
The empirical formula is CH O. The molecular formula is C H O
Answer d
The empirical formula is C H O. The molecular formula is C H O
Contributors and Attributions
Mike Blaber (Florida State University)
1.1.5: Empirical Formulas from Analysis is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.4 5
2 2
2 3 6 3.
10 14 20 28 2.

1.1.6.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1699571.1.6: Reaction Stoichiometry
To balance equations that describe reactions in solution.
To calculate the quantities of compounds produced or con sumed in a chemical reaction.
To solve quantitative problems involving the stoichiom etry of reactions in solution.
A balanced chemical equation gives the identity of the reactants and the products as well as the accurate number of molecules or
moles of each that are consumed or produced. Stoichiometry is a collective term for the quantitative relationsh ips between the
masses, the numbers of moles, and the numbers of part icles (atoms, molecules, and ions) of the reactants and the products in a
balanced chemical equation. A stoichiometric quantity is the amount of product or reactant specified by th e coefficients in a
balanced chemical equation. This section describes h ow to use the stoichiometry of a reaction to answer ques tions like the
following: How much oxygen is needed to ensure complet e combustion of a given amount of isooctane? (This in formation is
crucial to the design of nonpolluting and efficient automobile engines.) How many grams of pure gold can b e obtained from a ton
of low-grade gold ore? (The answer determines whether t he ore deposit is worth mining.) If an industrial plan t must produce a
certain number of tons of sulfuric acid per week, how much elemental sulfur must arrive by rail each week?
All these questions can be answered using the concepts of the mole, molar and formula masses, and solution con centrations, along
with the coefficients in the appropriate balanced chemical equation.
Stoichiometry Problems
When carrying out a reaction in either an industria l setting or a laboratory, it is easier to work with m asses of substances than with
the numbers of molecules or moles. The general method for converting from the mass of any reactant or pr oduct to the mass of any
other reactant or product using a balanced chemical e quation is outlined in and described in the following tex t.
Steps in Converting between Masses of Reactant and Product
1. Convert the mass of one substance (substance A) to the corresponding number of moles using its molar mass.
2. From the balanced chemical equation, obtain the number o f moles of another substance (B) from the number of moles of
substance A using the appropriate mole ratio (the ratio of their coefficients).
3. Convert the number of moles of substance B to mass using its molar mass. It is important to remember that some spec ies are
present in excess by virtue of the reaction conditions. Fo r example, if a substance reacts with the oxygen in air, t hen oxygen is
in obvious (but unstated) excess.
Converting amounts of substances to moles—and vice ve rsa—is the key to all stoichiometry problems, whether the amounts are
given in units of mass (grams or kilograms), weight (pounds or tons), or volume (liters or gallons).
Figure: A Flowchart for Stoichiometric Calculations I nvolving Pure Substances. The molar masses of the react ants and the
products are used as conversion factors so that you can c alculate the mass of product from the mass of reactant and vice versa.
To illustrate this procedure, consider the combustion of g lucose. Glucose reacts with oxygen to produce carbon dioxide and water:
Just before a chemistry exam, suppose a friend remind s you that glucose is the major fuel used by the hum an brain. You therefore
decide to eat a candy bar to make sure that your br ain does not run out of energy during the exam (eve n though there is no direct
evidence that consumption of candy bars improves perf ormance on chemistry exams). If a typical 2 oz candy bar contains the
equivalent of 45.3 g of glucose and the glucose is c ompletely converted to carbon dioxide during the ex am, how many grams of
carbon dioxide will you produce and exhale into the exam r oom?Learning Objectives

1.1.6.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169957The initial step in solving a problem of this type is to write the balanced chemical equation for the re action. Inspection shows that it
is balanced as written, so the strategy outlined above can be adapted as follows:
3. Use the molar mass of CO (44.010 g/mol) to calculate the mass of CO corresponding to 1.51 mol of CO:
These operations can be summarized as follows:
Discrepancies between the two values are attributed to r ounding errors resulting from using stepwise calculati ons in steps 1–3.
(Remember that you should generally carry extra sign ificant digits through a multistep calculation to th e end to avoid this!) This
amount of gaseous carbon dioxide occupies an enormo us volume—more than 33 L. Similar methods can be used to calculate the
amount of oxygen consumed or the amount of water produced.
The balanced chemical equation was used to calculate the mass of product that is formed from a certain amo unt of reactant. It can
also be used to determine the masses of reactants th at are necessary to form a certain amount of product or, as shown in Example
, the mass of one reactant that is required to consume a g iven mass of another reactant.
The combustion of hydrogen with oxygen to produce ga seous water is extremely vigorous, producing one of the hottest flames
known. Because so much energy is released for a give n mass of hydrogen or oxygen, this reaction was used t o fuel the NASA
(National Aeronautics and Space Administration) space s huttles, which have recently been retired from servi ce. NASA
engineers calculated the exact amount of each react ant needed for the flight to make sure that the shut tles did not carry excess
fuel into orbit. Calculate how many tons of hydrogen a space shuttle needed to carry for each 1.00 tn of o xygen (1 tn = 2000
lb).
Given: reactants, products, and mass of one reactant
Asked for: mass of other reactant
Strategy:
A. Write the balanced chemical equation for the reaction.
B. Convert mass of oxygen to moles. From the mole ratio i n the balanced chemical equation, determine the number of m oles
of hydrogen required. Then convert the moles of hydroge n to the equivalent mass in tons.
Solution:
We use the same general strategy for solving stoich iometric calculations as in the preceding example. B ecause the amount of
oxygen is given in tons rather than grams, however, we also need to convert tons to units of mass in grams. Another conversion
is needed at the end to report the final answer in tons.
A. We first use the information given to write a balan ced chemical equation. Because we know the identity of both the
reactants and the product, we can write the reaction as fol lows:
This equation is not balanced because there are two ox ygen atoms on the left side and only one on the righ t. Assigning a
coefficient of 2 to both H O and H gives the balanced chemi cal equation:
Thus 2 mol of H react with 1 mol of O to produce 2 mol of H O.
B.
1. To convert tons of oxygen to units of mass in grams, we mul tiply by the appropriate conversion factors:2 2 2
Example: The US Space Shuttle
2 2
2 2 2

1.1.6.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1699572. Using the molar mass of O2 (32.00 g/mol, to four significan t figures), we can calculate the number of moles of O2
contained in this mass of O2:
3. Now use the coefficients in the balanced chemical equa tion to obtain the number of moles of H2 needed to react wit h this
number of moles of O2:BREAK
4. The molar mass of H2 (2.016 g/mol) allows us to calculate the corresponding mass of H2:B
5. Finally, convert the mass of H2 to the desired units (ton s) by using the appropriate conversion factors:
The space shuttle had to be designed to carry 0.126 tn of H for each 1.00 tn of O. Even though 2 mol of H are needed to
react with each mole of O, the molar mass of H2 is so m uch smaller than that of O that only a relatively sm all mass of H is
needed compared to the mass of O.
Cinnabar, (or Cinnabarite) is the common ore of mercur y. Because of its mercury content, cinnabar can be toxic t o
human beings; however, because of its red color, it has also been used since ancient times as a pigment. Alchemists
produced elemental mercury by roasting cinnabar ore in air:
The volatility and toxicity of mercury make this a hazardous procedure, which likely shortened the life span of many
alchemists. Given 100 g of cinnabar, how much elemental mer cury can be produced from this reaction?
Answer
86.2 g
Copper reacts with nitric acid as follows:
A chemist mixes 4.523 g of copper and 11.716 g of nitric acid.
a) Which reactant (if any) will remain if the reacti on goes to completion, and how many grams of that rea ctant will be left
over?
b) What mass of nitrogen dioxide will be formed, assumin g 100% yield?
c) If the chemist isolates 8.333 g of copper(II) nitrat e, what is the percent yield in this experiment?
Answer2 2 2
2 2 2
Exercise: Roasting Cinnabar
Exercise: Copper Reacts with Nitric Acid

1.1.6.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169957a) First, you must determine the limiting reactant, wh ich can be done in several ways. One simple option is t o calculate the
mass of one of the products based on each reactant; the reactant that gives the smaller mass of product is the limiting
reactant. This method is convenient here because if we choose NO as our product, we will also get the answer t o part b of
the problem.
If we use all of the Cu, we will form…
If we use all of the HNO, we will form…
Since the HNO gives less product, HNO is the limiting re actant and will be completely consumed in the reactio n.
Therefore, Cu will remain after the reaction goes to completion. To calculate the remaining mass of Cu, we must first
determine how much Cu is consumed, given that all of the HNO reac ts:
The remaining mass of Cu is therefore 4.523 g – 2.954 g = 1.569 g.
b) As we found in part a, we will form 4.277 g of NO.
c) Calculate the mass of Cu(NO) that should be formed (the t heoretical yield):
The percent yield is:
Stoichiometry problems can be approached by using "IC E" tables to organize your thoughts. ICE stands for "Initial moles",
"Change in moles", and " End number of moles." Complete the following ICE table s. For each of these tables, the relevant
reaction is:
Stoichiometry Table
a) 2 C H 7 O 4 CO 6 H O
Initial 2.474 mol 5.131 mol 0 mol 0 mol
Change
End

Answer (a)
As in any stoichiometry problem where you are given the numbers of moles of each reactant, you must first det ermine the
limiting reactant. In an ICE table, a simple way to d o this (if it isn’t immediately obvious) is to assum e that the first reactant
is completely used up and calculate the number of m oles of the other reactant(s) that will be consumed. Then check to be
sure that you aren’t using more moles than you started wit h.
For example, let’s assume that all of the C H is consumed. How much O will we use?
will be used2
3 3
3 2

Example: Working with Ice Tables
2 6 2 2 2
2 6 2

1.1.6.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169957Inserting these numbers into the table gives us:
Stoichiometry Table
2 C H 7 O 4 CO 6 H O
Initial 2.474 mol 5.131 mol 0 mol 0 mol
Change – 2.474 mol – 8.659 mol
End 0 mol-3.528 mol
We end up with a negative amount of oxygen, because we used more moles than we were given. This is obviously
impossible, so O must be the limiting reactant. Once we know this, it is straightforward to complete the tabl e. The amount
of C H that we use up is:
The amount of CO that we make is:
The amount of H O that we make is calculated similarly. The c ompleted table looks like this:
Stoichiometry Table
2 C H 7 O 4 CO 6 H O
Initial 2.474 mol 5.131 mol 0 mol 0 mol
Change – 1.466 mol – 5.131 mol + 2.932 mol + 4.398 mol
End 1.008 mol 0 mol 2.932 mol 4.398 mol
Stoichiometry Table
b) 2 C H 7 O 4 CO 6 H O
Initial 0.0518 mol 0.2331 mol 0.0489 mol 0 mol
Change
End

Answer (b)
In this table, we have some CO (a product) in the ini tial mixture. This does not affect any of our calcul ations; the CO we
make in the reaction just gets added to this initial amoun t.
In this case, the limiting reactant is C H. You can d etermine this using the same method we used in part a. The completed
table looks like this:
Stoichiometry Table
2 C H 7 O 4 CO 6 H O
Initial 0.0518 mol 0.2331 mol 0.0489 mol 0 mol
Change – 0.0518 mol –0.1813 mol + 0.1036 mol + 0.1554 mol
End 0 mol 0.0518 mol 0.1525 mol 0.1554 mol2 6 2 2 2
2 6

2 6 2 2 2
2 6 2 2 2
2 2
2 6
2 6 2 2 2

1.1.6.6 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169957The mole-to-mol ratios in a balanced chemical equat ion are at the heart of reaction stoichiometry. In f act, you can consider the
amounts of reactants mixed together in terms of var iable and still work through a stoichiometry problem. We will again use
"ICE" tables to organize our thoughts. Complete the foll owing ICE tables. For each of these tables, the relevant react ion is:
Stoichiometry Table
a) 2 C H 7 O 4 CO 6 H O
Initial x mol 2 x mol 0 mol 0 mol
Change
End

Answer (a)
What do we do with variables?? We treat them the same we treat numbers! Let’s assume that all of the C H is consumed,
just as did in part a. How much O will we use?
If we use x mol of C H and 3.5 x mol of O, our table will look like this:
Stoichiometry Table
2 C H 7 O 4 CO 6 H O
Initial x mol 2 x mol 0 mol 0 mol
Change – x mol – 3.5 x mol
End 0 mol -1.5x mol
As in part a of Exercise, if we use all of the C H, we u se more O than we actually have. Therefore, O must be the
limiting reactant. The amount of C H we use is:
The amount of CO we make is:
The amount of H O we make is:
The completed table looks like this:
Stoichiometry Table
2 C H 7 O 4 CO 6 H O
Initial x mol 2 x mol 0 mol 0 mol
Change – 0.5714 x mol – 2 x mol + 1.1429 x mol + 1.7143 x mol
End 0.4286 x mol 0 mol 1.1429 x mol 1.7143 x molExample: Stoichiometry and Algebraic Variables
2 6 2 2 2
2 6
2 6 2
2 6 2 2 2
2 6 2 2
2 6
2 6 2 2 2

1.1.6.7 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169957(You can also express all of the moles as fractions. T he final numbers will be / x mol C H, / x mol CO, and / x mol
H O.)
For part b, complete the table assuming that C H is the l imiting reactant.
Stoichiometry Table
b) 2 C H 7 O 4 CO 6 H O
Initial x mol y mol 0 mol 0 mol
Change
End

Answer (b)
We are told that C H is the limiting reactant, so al l of the amounts in the “change” row will be based on the initial moles of
C H. The amount of O that we use is:
The amount of CO we make will be:
The amount of H O we make will be:
The completed table looks like this:
Stoichiometry Table
2 C H 7 O 4 CO 6 H O
Initial x mol y mol 0 mol 0 mol
Change – x mol – 3.5 x mol + 2 x mol + 3 x mol
End 0 mol y – 3.5 x mol 2 x mol 3 x mol
For part c, complete the table assuming that O is the li miting reactant.
Stoichiometry Table
c) 2 C H 7 O 4 CO 6 H O
Initial x mol y mol 0 mol 0 mol
Change
End

Answer (c)
Now we are told that O is the limiting reactant. You sh ould be able to figure out the amounts in the “chan ge” row using the
same method we used in parts b and c. The completed table l ooks like this:
Stoichiometry Table37 2 687 2127
2 6
2 6 2 2 2
2 6
2 6 2
2 6 2 2 2
2 6 2 2 2

1.1.6.8 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169957 2 C H 7 O 4 CO 6 H O
Initial x mol y mol 0 mol 0 mol
Change – 0.2857 y mol – y mol + 0.5714 y mol + 0.8571 y mol
End x – 0.2857 y mol 0 mol 0.5714 y mol 0.8571 y mol
As in part b, you can also express the amounts as frac tions if you choose. The final numbers will be x – / y mol C H, / y
mol CO, and / y mol H O.
Summary
The coefficients in the balanced chemical equation t ell how many moles of reactants are needed and how ma ny moles of product
can be produced.
1. Use the molar mass of glucose (to one decimal place, 180.2 g/mol) to determine the number of moles of glucose in th e candy
bar:
2. According to the balanced chemical equation, 6 mol of CO is produced per mole of glucose; the mole ratio of CO to glucose
is therefore 6:1. The number of moles of CO produced is th us
1.1.6: Reaction Stoichiometry is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.2 6 2 2 2
7 2 64
267 2
2 2

1.1.7.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1699581.1.7: Limiting Reactants
To understand the concept of limiting reactants and qu antify incomplete reactions
In all the examples discussed thus far, the reactant s were assumed to be present in stoichiometric quantit ies. Consequently, none of
the reactants was left over at the end of the reactio n. This is often desirable, as in the case of a space shuttle, where excess oxygen
or hydrogen was not only extra freight to be hauled i nto orbit but also an explosion hazard. More often, ho wever, reactants are
present in mole ratios that are not the same as the ratio of the coefficients in the balanced chemical e quation. As a result, one or
more of them will not be used up completely but will b e left over when the reaction is completed. In this s ituation, the amount of
product that can be obtained is limited by the amou nt of only one of the reactants. The reactant that res tricts the amount of product
obtained is called the limiting reactant. The reactant that remains after a reaction has gone to completion is in e xcess.
Consider a nonchemical example. Assume you have invi ted some friends for dinner and want to bake brownies for dessert. You
find two boxes of brownie mix in your pantry and see t hat each package requires two eggs. The balanced equat ion for brownie
preparation is thus
If you have a dozen eggs, which ingredient will deter mine the number of batches of brownies that you can p repare? Because each
box of brownie mix requires two eggs and you have two b oxes, you need four eggs. Twelve eggs is eight more eg gs than you need.
Although the ratio of eggs to boxes in is 2:1, the ra tio in your possession is 6:1. Hence the eggs are the ingredient (reactant) present
in excess, and the brownie mix is the limiting react ant. Even if you had a refrigerator full of eggs, yo u could make only two batches
of brownies.
Figure: The Concept of a Limiting Reactant in the Preparation of Brownies
Now consider a chemical example of a limiting reactant: the production of pure titanium. This metal is fai rly light (45% lighter
than steel and only 60% heavier than aluminum) and h as great mechanical strength (as strong as steel and t wice as strong as
aluminum). Because it is also highly resistant to co rrosion and can withstand extreme temperatures, titaniu m has many applications
in the aerospace industry. Titanium is also used in m edical implants and portable computer housings beca use it is light and resistant
to corrosion. Although titanium is the ninth most co mmon element in Earth’s crust, it is relatively diffi cult to extract from its ores.
In the first step of the extraction process, titanium- containing oxide minerals react with solid carbon and chlorine gas to form
titanium tetrachloride () and carbon dioxide.
Titanium tetrachloride is then converted to metallic tit anium by reaction with molten magnesium metal at high tempe rature:
Because titanium ores, carbon, and chlorine are all rather inexpensive, the high price of titanium (abo ut $100 per kilogram) is
largely due to the high cost of magnesium metal. Unde r these circumstances, magnesium metal is the limiti ng reactant in the
production of metallic titanium.Learning Objectives

1.1.7.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169958
Figure: Medical use of titanium. Here is an example of its succ essful use in joint replacement implants. An A-P X-ray o f a
pelvis showing a total hip joint replacement. The right hip joint (on the left in the photograph) has been r eplaced. A metal
prostheses is cemented in the top of the right femur and the head of the femur has been replaced by the rounde d head of the
prosthesis. Figure courtesy of NIH (NIADDK) 9AO4 (Connie Raab)
With 1.00 kg of titanium tetrachloride and 200 g of magnesium metal, how much titanium metal can be produ ced according to
Equation?
1. Determine the number of moles of each reactant.
2. Compare the mole ratio of the reactants with the ratio in the balanced chemical equation to determine which reactant is
limiting.
3. Calculate the number of moles of product that can be obtained from the limiting reactant.
4. Convert the number of moles of product to mass of prod uct.
Step 1: To determine the number of moles of reactants pre sent, calculate or look up their molar masses: 189.679 g/mol for
titanium tetrachloride and 24.305 g/mol for magnesium. Th e number of moles of each is calculated as follows:
Step 2: There are more moles of magnesium than of titanium tetr achloride, but the ratio is only the following:
Because the ratio of the coefficients in the balanced chem ical equation is,
there is not have enough magnesium to react with all t he titanium tetrachloride. If this point is not clea r from the mole ratio,
calculate the number of moles of one reactant that is required for complete reaction of the other reac tant. For example, there
are 8.23 mol of, so (8.23 ÷ 2) = 4.12 mol of are re quired for complete reaction. Because there are 5.27 2 mol of
, titanium tetrachloride is present in excess. Convers ely, 5.272 mol of requires 2 × 5.272 = 10.54 mol of Mg, but
there are only 8.23 mol. Therefore, magnesium is the limiti ng reactant.Solving this type of problem requires that you carry out the following steps

1.1.7.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169958Step 3: Because magnesium is the limiting reactant, the num ber of moles of magnesium determines the number of moles of
titanium that can be formed:
Thus only 4.12 mol of Ti can be formed.
Step 4. To calculate the mass of titanium metal that can o btain, multiply the number of moles of titanium by the molar mass
of titanium (47.867 g/mol):
Here is a simple and reliable way to identify the limiting r eactant in any problem of this sort:
1. Calculate the number of moles of each reactant presen t: 5.272 mol of and 8.23 mol of Mg.
2. Divide the actual number of moles of each reactant by i ts stoichiometric coefficient in the balanced chemical eq uation:
3. The reactant with the smallest mole ratio is limiting. M agnesium, with a calculated stoichiometric mole ratio of 4.12, is the
limiting reactant.
Density is the mass per unit volume of a substance. If we are given the density of a substance, we can use it in stoichiometric
calculations involving liquid reactants and/or products, as Example demonstrates.
Ethyl acetate () is the solvent in many fingernail po lish removers and is used to decaffeinate coffee be ans and tea
leaves. It is prepared by reacting ethanol () with ac etic acid (); the other product is water. A small amou nt of
sulfuric acid is used to accelerate the reaction, but the sulfuric acid is not consumed and does not appe ar in the balanced
chemical equation. Given 10.0 mL each of acetic acid a nd ethanol, how many grams of ethyl acetate can be p repared from this
reaction? The densities of acetic acid and ethanol are 1.0492 g/mL and 0.7893 g/mL, respectively.
Given: reactants, products, and volumes and densities of react ants
Asked for: mass of product
Strategy:Example: Fingernail Polish Remover

1.1.7.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169958A. Balance the chemical equation for the reaction.
B. Use the given densities to convert from volume to mass. Then use each molar mass to convert from mass to mole s.
C. Using mole ratios, determine which substance is the limitin g reactant. After identifying the limiting reactant, use mole
ratios based on the number of moles of limiting reactant t o determine the number of moles of product.
D. Convert from moles of product to mass of product.
Solution:
A Always begin by writing the balanced chemical equation for t he reaction:
B We need to calculate the number of moles of ethano l and acetic acid that are present in 10.0 mL of each. Recall that the
density of a substance is the mass divided by the volume:
Rearranging this expression gives mass = (density)(v olume). We can replace mass by the product of the de nsity and the volume
to calculate the number of moles of each substance in 1 0.0 mL (remember, 1 mL = 1 cm):
C The number of moles of acetic acid exceeds the numb er of moles of ethanol. Because the reactants both h ave coefficients of
1 in the balanced chemical equation, the mole ratio is 1:1. We have 0.171 mol of ethanol and 0.175 mol of acetic acid, so
ethanol is the limiting reactant and acetic acid is in excess. The coefficient in the balanced chemical equation for the product
(ethyl acetate) is also 1, so the mole ratio of etha nol and ethyl acetate is also 1:1. This means that g iven 0.171 mol of ethanol,
the amount of ethyl acetate produced must also be 0.171 mol:
D The final step is to determine the mass of ethyl ace tate that can be formed, which we do by multiplying th e number of moles
by the molar mass:3

1.1.7.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169958Thus 15.1 g of ethyl acetate can be prepared in thi s reaction. If necessary, you could use the density o f ethyl acetate (0.9003
g/cm3) to determine the volume of ethyl acetate that cou ld be produced:
Under appropriate conditions, the reaction of elemen tal phosphorus and elemental sulfur produces the com pound. How
much can be prepared starting with 10.0 g of and 30.0 g o f?
Answer
35.9 g
Limiting Reactants in Solutions
The concept of limiting reactants applies to reacti ons carried out in solution as well as to reactions in volving pure substances. If all
the reactants but one are present in excess, then the amount of the limiting reactant may be calculated as illustrated in Example
Because the consumption of alcoholic beverages adver sely affects the performance of tasks that require s kill and judgment, in
most countries it is illegal to drive while under th e influence of alcohol. In almost all US states, a blo od alcohol level of 0.08%
by volume is considered legally drunk. Higher levels c ause acute intoxication (0.20%), unconsciousness (abo ut 0.30%), and
even death (about 0.50%). The Breathalyzer is a port able device that measures the ethanol concentration in a person’s breath,
which is directly proportional to the blood alcohol level. The reaction used in the Breathalyzer is the oxidation of ethanol by
the dichromate ion:
When a measured volume (52.5 mL) of a suspect’s brea th is bubbled through a solution of excess potassium d ichromate in
dilute sulfuric acid, the ethanol is rapidly absorbed and oxidized to acetic acid by the dichromate ions. I n the process, the
chromium atoms in some of the ions are reduced fro m Cr to Cr. In the presence of Ag ions that act as a catalyst,
the reaction is complete in less than a minute. Becaus e the ion (the reactant) is yellow-orange and the C r ion (the
product) forms a green solution, the amount of ethano l in the person’s breath (the limiting reactant) can be determined quite
accurately by comparing the color of the final solu tion with the colors of standard solutions prepared with known amounts of
ethanol.
A Breathalyzer reaction with a test tube before (a) and after (b) ethanol is added. When a measured volum e of a suspect’s
breath is bubbled through the solution, the ethanol i s oxidized to acetic acid, and the solution changes co lor from yelloworange to green. The intensity of the green color in dicates the amount of ethanol in the sample.Exercise
Example: Breathalyzer reaction
6+ 3+ +
3+

1.1.7.6 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169958A typical Breathalyzer ampul contains 3.0 mL of a 0.2 5 mg/mL solution of K Cr O in 50% H SO as well as a fixe d
concentration of AgNO (typically 0.25 mg/mL is used fo r this purpose). How many grams of ethanol must be presen t in 52.5
mL of a person’s breath to convert all the Cr to Cr?
Given: volume and concentration of one reactant
Asked for: mass of other reactant needed for complete reaction
Strategy:
A. Calculate the number of moles of ion in 1 mL of the Br eathalyzer solution by dividing the mass of K Cr O by its
molar mass.
B. Find the total number of moles of ion in the Breathal yzer ampul by multiplying the number of moles contain ed in
1 mL by the total volume of the Breathalyzer solution (3.0 mL).
C. Use the mole ratios from the balanced chemical equa tion to calculate the number of moles of C H OH needed to r eact
completely with the number of moles of ions present. Then f ind the mass of C H OH needed by multiplying the
number of moles of C H OH by its molar mass.
Solution:
A In any stoichiometry problem, the first step is al ways to calculate the number of moles of each reactan t present. In this case,
we are given the mass of K Cr O in 1 mL of solution, which can be used to calculate the number of moles of K C r O
contained in 1 mL:
B Because 1 mol of K Cr O produces 1 mol of when it di ssolves, each milliliter of solution contains 8.5 × 10 mol
of Cr O. The total number of moles of Cr O in a 3.0 mL B reathalyzer ampul is thus
C The balanced chemical equation tells us that 3 mol of C H OH is needed to consume 2 mol of ion, so the t otal
number of moles of C H OH required for complete reaction is
As indicated in the strategy, this number can be converted to the mass of C H OH using its molar mass:
Thus 1.8 × 10 g or 0.18 mg of C H OH must be present. Expe rimentally, it is found that this value corresponds to a blood
alcohol level of 0.7%, which is usually fatal.
Theoretical Yields
When reactants are not present in stoichiometric qu antities, the limiting reactant determines the maximu m amount of product that
can be formed from the reactants. The amount of pro duct calculated in this way is the theoretical yield, the amount obtained if the
reaction occurred perfectly and the purification metho d were 100% efficient.
In reality, less product is always obtained than is t heoretically possible because of mechanical losses (such as spilling), separation
procedures that are not 100% efficient, competing r eactions that form undesired products, and reactions th at simply do not run to2 2 7 2 4
6+ 3+
2 2 7
2 5
2 5
2 5
2 2 7 2 2 7
2 2 7−7
2 72−2 72−
2 5
2 5
2 5
−42 5

1.1.7.7 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169958completion, resulting in a mixture of products and r eactants; this last possibility is a common occurrence. Therefore, the actual
yield, the measured mass of products obtained from a reaction, is almost always less than the theoretical yield (often much less).
The percent yield of a reaction is the ratio of the actua l yield to the theoretical yield, multiplied by 100 to give a percentage:
The method used to calculate the percent yield of a reac tion is illustrated in Example.
Procaine is a key component of Novocain, an injectabl e local anesthetic used in dental work and minor surge ry. Procaine can
be prepared in the presence of H2SO4 (indicated above the a rrow) by the reaction
If this reaction were carried out with 10.0 g of p-ami nobenzoic acid and 10.0 g of 2-diethylaminoethanol, and 15.7 g of
procaine were isolated, what is the percent yield?
The preparation of procaine. A reaction of p-aminobenzoic acid with 2-diethylaminoethanol yields procaine and water.
Given: masses of reactants and product
Asked for: percent yield
Strategy:
A. Write the balanced chemical equation.
B. Convert from mass of reactants and product to mole s using molar masses and then use mole ratios to determi ne which is the
limiting reactant. Based on the number of moles of the li miting reactant, use mole ratios to determine the theoret ical yield.
C. Calculate the percent yield by dividing the actual y ield by the theoretical yield and multiplying by 100.
Solution:
A From the formulas given for the reactants and the p roducts, we see that the chemical equation is balanced as written.
According to the equation, 1 mol of each reactant comb ines to give 1 mol of product plus 1 mol of water.
B To determine which reactant is limiting, we need to know their molar masses, which are calculated from their structural
formulas: p-aminobenzoic acid (C H NO), 137.14 g/mol; 2-diethylaminoethanol (C H NO), 117.19 g/mol. Thus the r eaction
used the following numbers of moles of reactants:
The reaction requires a 1:1 mole ratio of the two re actants, so p-aminobenzoic acid is the limiting react ant. Based on the
coefficients in the balanced chemical equation, 1 m ol of p-aminobenzoic acid yields 1 mol of procaine. W e can therefore obtain
only a maximum of 0.0729 mol of procaine. To calculat e the corresponding mass of procaine, we use its struc tural formula
(C13H20N2O2) to calculate its molar mass, which is 236.31 g/mo l.Example: Novocain
7 7 2 6 15

1.1.7.8 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169958C The actual yield was only 15.7 g of procaine, so the percen t yield (via Equation) is
(If the product were pure and dry, this yield would indicate very good lab technique!)
Lead was one of the earliest metals to be isolated in pure form. It occurs as concentrated deposits of a di stinctive ore called
galena (), which is easily converted to lead oxide () in 100 % yield by roasting in air via the following reaction:
The resulting is then converted to the pure metal b y reaction with charcoal. Because lead has such a low melting point
(327°C), it runs out of the ore-charcoal mixture as a liquid that is easily collected. The reaction for the conversion of lead oxide
to pure lead is as follows:
If 93.3 kg of is heated with excess charcoal and 77.3 kg of p ure lead is obtained, what is the percent yield?
Electrolytically refined pure (99.989 %) superficial ly oxidized lead nodules and a high purity (99.989 %) lead cube for
comparison. Figure used with permission from Wikipedia.
Answer
89.2%
Percent yield can range from 0% to 100%. In the labo ratory, a student will occasionally obtain a yield th at appears to be greater
than 100%. This usually happens when the product is i mpure or is wet with a solvent such as water. If this is not the case, then the
student must have made an error in weighing either t he reactants or the products. The law of conservation of mass applies even to
undergraduate chemistry laboratory experiments. A 10 0% yield means that everything worked perfectly, and the chemist obtained
all the product that could have been produced. Anyon e who has tried to do something as simple as fill a sa lt shaker or add oil to a
car’s engine without spilling knows the unlikelihood of a 100% yield. At the other extreme, a yield of 0% me ans that no product
was obtained. A percent yield of 80%–90% is usually considered good to excellent; a yield of 50% is onl y fair. In part because of
the problems and costs of waste disposal, industrial p roduction facilities face considerable pressures to o ptimize the yields of
products and make them as close to 100% as possible.
Summary
The stoichiometry of a balanced chemical equation id entifies the maximum amount of product that can be obtained. The
stoichiometry of a reaction describes the relative a mounts of reactants and products in a balanced chemi cal equation. A
stoichiometric quantity of a reactant is the amount necessary to react completely with the other reactan t(s). If a quantity of a
reactant remains unconsumed after complete reaction has occurred, it is in excess. The reactant that is co nsumed first and limits the
amount of product(s) that can be obtained is the li miting reactant. To identify the limiting reactant, calculate the number of moles of
each reactant present and compare this ratio to the mole ratio of the reactants in the balanced chemica l equation. The maximum
amount of product(s) that can be obtained in a reac tion from a given amount of reactant(s) is the theoret ical yield of the reaction.Exercise: Extraction of Lead

1.1.7.9 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169958The actual yield is the amount of product(s) actual ly obtained in the reaction; it cannot exceed the t heoretical yield. The percent
yield of a reaction is the ratio of the actual yield to th e theoretical yield, expressed as a percentage.
1.1.7: Limiting Reactants is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169961SECTION OVERVIEW
Topic B- Reactions in Aqueous Solution
WHAT YOU SHOULD BE ABLE TO DO WHEN YOU HA VE FINISHED THIS TOPIC:
1. Predict and write net ionic equations for the following rea ction types:
a. Acid-base reactions involving OH reacting with a strong or a weak acid.
b. Acid-base reactions involving NH reacting with a strong or a weak acid.
c. Formation of a weak acid from H and an anion.
d. Precipitation reactions.
e. Reactions of carbonates and bicarbonates with acids t o form CO.
2. Identify an ionic compound as soluble or insoluble in wate r, based on the solubility rules.
3. Determine any one of the molarity of a solution, the m ass of solute, and the volume of solution, given the othe r two.
4. Solve dilution problems.
5. Solve problems involving aqueous titration.
2.1: Reactions in Aqueous Solution
2.1.1: General Properties of Aqueous Solutions
2.1.1.1: Units of Concentration
2.1.2: Precipitation and Solubility Rules
2.1.3: Acid-Base Reactions
2.1.4: Other Common Reactions
2.1.5: Writing Net Ionic Equations
2.1.6: Concentration of Solutions
2.1.7: Solution Stoichiometry and Chemical Analysis
Topic B- Reactions in Aqueous Solution is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.Learning Objectives

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
2.1: Reactions in Aqueous Solution
A solution is a homogeneous mixture in which substance s present in lesser amounts, called solutes, are disperse d uniformly
throughout the substance in the greater amount, the solvent. An aqueous solution is a solution in which t he solvent is water,
whereas in a nonaqueous solution, the solvent is a subs tance other than water. Familiar examples of nonaqueou s solvents are ethyl
acetate, used in nail polish removers, and turpentine, u sed to clean paint brushes. In this chapter, we focus on reactions that occur in
aqueous solution.
There are many reasons for carrying out reactions in solution. For a chemical reaction to occur, individual atoms, molecules, or
ions must collide, and collisions between two solids, wh ich are not dispersed at the atomic, molecular, or ionic level, do not occur
at a significant rate. In addition, when the amount of a substance required for a reaction is so small t hat it cannot be weighed
accurately, using a solution of that substance, in which the solute is dispersed in a much larger mass of so lvent, enables chemists to
measure its quantity with great precision. Chemists c an also more effectively control the amount of heat consumed or produced in a
reaction when the reaction occurs in solution, and so metimes the nature of the reaction itself can be co ntrolled by the choice of
solvent.
This chapter introduces techniques for preparing and analyzing aqueous solutions, for balancing equation s that describe reactions in
solution, and for solving problems using solution stoic hiometry. By the time you complete this chapter, you will know enough
about aqueous solutions to explain what causes acid rai n, why acid rain is harmful, and how a Breathalyzer me asures alcohol
levels. You will also understand the chemistry of phot ographic development, be able to explain why rhubarb leaves are toxic, and
learn about a possible chemical reason for the decline an d fall of the Roman Empire.
2.1.1: General Properties of Aqueous Solutions
2.1.1.1: Units of Concentration
2.1.2: Precipitation and Solubility Rules
2.1.3: Acid-Base Reactions
2.1.4: Other Common Reactions
2.1.5: Writing Net Ionic Equations
2.1.6: Concentration of Solutions
2.1.7: Solution Stoichiometry and Chemical Analysis
2.1: Reactions in Aqueous Solution is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

2.1.1.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1699632.1.1: General Properties of Aqueous Solutions
To understand how and why solutions form
The solvent in aqueous solutions is water, which makes up about 70% of the mass of the human body and is ess ential for life. Many
of the chemical reactions that keep us alive depend on the interaction of water molecules with dissolved c ompounds. Moreover, the
presence of large amounts of water on Earth’s surfac e helps maintain its surface temperature in a range su itable for life. In this
section, we describe some of the interactions of water with various substances and introduce you to the char acteristics of aqueous
solutions.
Polar Substances
As shown in Figure, the individual water molecule consi sts of two hydrogen atoms bonded to an oxygen atom i n a bent (Vshaped) structure. As is typical of group 16 elements, the oxygen atom in each O–H covalent bond attracts el ectrons more strongly
than the hydrogen atom does. Consequently, the oxyge n and hydrogen nuclei do not equally share electron s. Instead, hydrogen
atoms are electron poor compared with a neutral hydr ogen atom and have a partial positive charge, which i s indicated by δ. The
oxygen atom, in contrast, is more electron rich than a neutral oxygen atom, so it has a partial negative charge. This charge must be
twice as large as the partial positive charge on each hydrogen for the molecule to have a net charge of zero. Thus its charge is
indicated by 2δ. This unequal distribution of charg e creates a polar bond in which one portion of the mo lecule carries a partial
negative charge, while the other portion carries a pa rtial positive charge (Figure). Because of the arrang ement of polar bonds
in a water molecule, water is described as a polar substance.
Figure: The Polar Nature of Water. Each water molecule consists of two hydrogen atoms bon ded to an oxygen atom in a
bent (V-shaped) structure. Because the oxygen atom attra cts electrons more strongly than the hydrogen atoms do, the oxygen atom
is partially negatively charged (2δ; blue) and the hyd rogen atoms are partially positively charged (δ; red). Fo r the molecule to
have a net charge of zero, the partial negative charge on oxyg en must be twice as large as the partial positive charge on ea ch
hydrogen.
Because of the asymmetric charge distribution in th e water molecule, adjacent water molecules are held tog ether by attractive
electrostatic (δ …δ) interactions between the partiall y negatively charged oxygen atom of one molecule an d the partially
positively charged hydrogen atoms of adjacent molec ules (Figure). Energy is needed to overcome these elect rostatic
attractions. In fact, without them, water would evaporat e at a much lower temperature, and neither Earth’s o ceans nor we would
exist!Learning Objectives

2.1.1.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169963
Figure: The Structure of Liquid Water. Two views of a water molecu le are shown: (a) a ball-and-stick structure and (b) a
space-filling model. Water molecules are held together by el ectrostatic attractions (dotted lines) between the par tially negatively
charged oxygen atom of one molecule and the partially posi tively charged hydrogen atoms on adjacent molecules. As a resul t, the
water molecules in liquid water form transient networks wit h structures similar to that shown. Because the interaction s between
water molecules are continually breaking and reforming, liqu id water does not have a single fixed structure.
As you learned previously,, ionic compounds such as sod ium chloride (NaCl) are also held together by electr ostatic interactions—
in this case, between oppositely charged ions in the hi ghly ordered solid, where each ion is surrounded by i ons of the opposite
charge in a fixed arrangement. In contrast to an ion ic solid, the structure of liquid water is not complete ly ordered because the
interactions between molecules in a liquid are constant ly breaking and reforming.
The unequal charge distribution in polar liquids such as water makes them good solvents for ionic compoun ds. When an ionic solid
dissolves in water, the ions dissociate. That is, the partially negatively charged oxygen atoms of the H O molecules surround the
cations (Na in the case of NaCl), and the partially posi tively charged hydrogen atoms in H O surround the anion s (Cl; Figure
). Individual cations and anions that are each surro unded by their own shell of water molecules are calle d hydrated ions. We
can describe the dissolution of NaCl in water as
where (aq) indicates that Na and Cl are hydrated ions.
Figure: The Dissolution of Sodium Chloride in Water. An ionic solid such as sodium chloride dissolves in water be cause of
the electrostatic attraction between the cations (Na) and the partially negatively charged oxygen atoms of wat er molecules, and
between the anions (Cl) and the partially positively ch arged hydrogen atoms of water.
Polar liquids are good solvents for ionic compounds.2
+2−

2.1.1.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169963Electrolytes
When electricity, in the form of an electrical potential, is applied to a solution, ions in solution migrate t oward the oppositely
charged rod or plate to complete an electrical circ uit, whereas neutral molecules in solution do not (Figur e). Thus solutions
that contain ions conduct electricity, while solution s that contain only neutral molecules do not. Electr ical current will flow through
the circuit shown in Figure and the bulb will glow only if ions are present. The lower the concentration of ions in solution,
the weaker the current and the dimmer the glow. Pure wa ter, for example, contains only very low concentration s of ions, so it is a
poor electrical conductor.
Solutions that contain ions conduct electricity.
Figure: The conductivity of electrolyte solutions: (a) 0.1 M NaCl; (b) 0.05 M NaCl; (c) 0.1 M HgCl. An electrolyte solution
conducts electricity because of the movement of ions in the solution. The larger the concentration of ions, the bette r the solution
conducts. Weak electrolytes, such as HgCl, conduct badly bec ause they produce very few ions when dissolved and exist ma inly in
the form of molecules. Figure used with permission from ChemePri me.
An electrolyte is any compound that can form ions whe n dissolved in water. Electrolytes may be strong or wea k. When strong
electrolytes dissolve, the constituent ions dissociate completely due to strong electrostatic interaction s with the solvent, producing
aqueous solutions that conduct electricity very well (Figure). Examples include ionic compounds such as bar ium chloride (
) and sodium hydroxide (NaOH), which are both strong electro lytes and dissociate as follows:
The single arrows from reactant to products in Equations and indicate that dissociation is complete.
When weak electrolytes dissolve, they produce relativ ely few ions in solution. This does not necessarily mean that the compounds
do not dissolve readily in water; many weak electrolyt es contain polar bonds and are therefore very soluble in a polar solvent such
as water. They do not completely dissociate to form i ons, however, because of their weaker electrostatic inte ractions with the
solvent. Because very few of the dissolved particles are ions, aqueous solutions of weak electrolytes do n ot conduct electricity as
well as solutions of strong electrolytes. One such com pound is acetic acid (CH CO H), which contains the –CO H u nit. Although it
is soluble in water, it is a weak acid and therefore a lso a weak electrolyte. Similarly, ammonia (NH) is a weak base and therefore a
weak electrolyte. The behavior of weak acids and weak bases will be described in more detail later.2
3 2 2

2.1.1.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169963

General structure of an aldehyde and a ketone. Notice that both contain the C=O group.
Nonelectrolytes (a substance that dissolves in water to form neutral molecules and has essentially no effec t on electrical
conductivity) that dissolve in water do so as neutral mo lecules and thus have essentially no effect on conduct ivity. Examples of
nonelectrolytes that are very soluble in water but tha t are essentially nonconductive are ethanol, ethyle ne glycol, glucose, and
sucrose, all of which contain the –OH group that is cha racteristic of alcohols. The topic of why alcohols a nd carboxylic acids
behave differently in aqueous solution is for a diffe rent Module; for now, however, you can simply look for the presence of the –
OH and –CO H groups when trying to predict whether a substa nce is a strong electrolyte, a weak electrolyte, or a nonelectrolyte.
The distinctions between soluble and insoluble substa nces and between strong, weak, and nonelectrolytes are illustrated in Figure
Figure: The Difference between Soluble and Insoluble Compounds (a) and Strong, Weak, and Nonelectrolytes (b). When a
soluble compound dissolves, its constituent atoms, molecule s, or ions disperse throughout the solvent. In contrast, th e constituents
of an insoluble compound remain associated with one anothe r in the solid. A soluble compound is a strong electrol yte if it
dissociates completely into ions, a weak electrolyte if it dissociates only slightly into ions, and a nonelectroly te if it dissolves to
produce only neutral molecules.
Ionic substances and carboxylic acids are electrolytes; alcohols, aldehydes, and k etones
are nonelectrolytes.
Predict whether each compound is a strong electrolyte, a we ak electrolyte, or a nonelectrolyte in water.
a. formaldehyde2
Example

2.1.1.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169963
b. cesium chloride
Given: compound
Asked for: relative ability to form ions in water
Strategy:
A Classify the compound as ionic or covalent.
B If the compound is ionic and dissolves, it is a stro ng electrolyte that will dissociate in water completel y to produce a solution
that conducts electricity well. If the compound is cov alent and organic, determine whether it contains the carboxylic acid
group. If the compound contains this group, it is a weak el ectrolyte. If not, it is a nonelectrolyte.
Solution:
1. A Formaldehyde is an organic compound, so it is covalent. B It contains an aldehyde group, not a carboxylic acid group, so
it should be a nonelectrolyte.
2. A Cesium chloride (CsCl) is an ionic compound that consist s of Cs and Cl ions. B Like virtually all other ionic
compounds that are soluble in water, cesium chloride will dis sociate completely into Cs (aq) and Cl (aq) ions. Hence it
should be a strong electrolyte.
Predict whether each compound is a strong electrolyte, a we ak electrolyte, or a nonelectrolyte in water.
a. (CH) CHOH (2-propanol)
b. ammonium sulfate
Answer
a. nonelectrolyte
b. strong electrolyte+ −
Exercise
3 2

2.1.1.6 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169963Summary
Aqueous solutions can be classified as polar or nonpol ar depending on how well they conduct electricity. Mos t chemical reactions
are carried out in solutions, which are homogeneous mixtures of two or more substan ces. In a solution, a solute (the substance
present in the lesser amount) is dispersed in a solvent (the substance present in the greater amount). Aqueous solutions contain
water as the solvent, whereas nonaqueous solutions have solvents other than water. Polar substances, suc h as water, contain
asymmetric arrangements of polar bonds, in which electrons are shared unequally between bon ded atoms. Polar substances and
ionic compounds tend to be most soluble in water becau se they interact favorably with its structure. In aque ous solution, dissolved
ions become hydrated; that is, a shell of water molecules surrounds them. Substances that dissolve in water can be categorized
according to whether the resulting aqueous solutions c onduct electricity. Strong electrolytes dissociate completely into ions to
produce solutions that conduct electricity well. Weak electrolytes produce a relatively small number of ions, resulting in solutions
that conduct electricity poorly. Nonelectrolytes dissolve as uncharged molecules and have no effect on the electrical conductivity
of water.
Contributors and Attributions
Modified by Joshua Halpern (Howard University)
2.1.1: General Properties of Aqueous Solutions is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
LibreTexts.

2.1.1.1.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3385062.1.1.1: Units of Concentration
Solutions are homogeneous mixtures containing one or more solutes in a solvent. The solvent that makes up most of the solution,
whereas a solute is the substance that is dissolved inside the solvent.
Relative Concentration Units
Concentrations are often expressed in terms of rela tive unites (e.g. percentages) with three different typ es of percentage
concentrations commonly used:
1. Mass Percent: The mass percent is used to express the concentration of a solution when the mass of a solute and the mass of a
solution is given:
2. Volume Percent: The volume percent is used to express the concentratio n of a solution when the volume of a solute and the
volume of a solution is given:
3. Mass/Volume Percent: Another version of a percentage concentration is mass/vo lume percent, which measures the mass or
weight of solute in grams (e.g., in grams) vs. the volume of soluti on (e.g., in mL). An example would be a 0.9%(w/v)
solution in medical saline solutions that contains 0.9 g of for every 100 mL of solution (see figure below). The
mass/volume percent is used to express the concentration of a solution when the mass of the solute and volume of th e solution
is given. Since the numerator and denominator have differe nt units, this concentration unit is not a true relative unit (e.g.
percentage), however it is often used as an easy concentratio n unit since volumes of solvent and solutions are easier to measu re
than weights. Moreover, since the density of dilute aque ous solutions are close to 1 g/mL, if the volume of a solution i n
measured in mL (as per definition), then this well approxim ates the mass of the solution in grams (making a true relet ive unit
(m/m)).
Figure used with permission from Wikipedia.
For example, In the United States, alcohol content in spi rits is defined as twice the percentage of alcohol by volume (v/v)
called proof. What is the concentration of alcohol in Bacardi 151 spirits that is sold at 151 proof (hence the name)?Example: Alcohol "Proof" as a Unit of Concentration

2.1.1.1.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/338506
Figure: A mostly-empty bottle of Bacardi 151. from Wi kipedia.
Solution
It will have an alcohol content of 75.5% (w/w) as per defi nition of "proof".
When calculating these percentages, that the units of the solute and solution should be equivalent units (a nd weight/volume percent
(w/v %) is defined in terms of grams and mililiters).
You CANNOT plug in… You CANNOT plug in…
(2 g Solute) / (1 kg Solution) (2 g Solute) / (1000 g So lution)
or (0.002 kg Solute) / (1 kg Solution)
(5 mL Solute) / (1 L Solution) (5 mL Solute) / (1000 mL Solution)
or (0.005 L Solute) / (1 L Solution)
(8 g Solute) / (1 L Solution) (8 g Solute) / (1000 mL So lution)
or (0.008 kg Solute) / (1 L Solution)
Dilute Concentrations Units
Sometimes when solutions are too dilute, their percent age concentrations are too low. So, instead of using r eally low percentage
concentrations such as 0.00001% or 0.000000001%, we cho ose another way to express the concentrations. This n ext way of
expressing concentrations is similar to cooking reci pes. For example, a recipe may tell you to use 1 part sugar, 10 parts water. As
you know, this allows you to use amounts such as 1 cup s ugar + 10 cups water in your equation. However, instead o f using the
recipe's "1 part per ten" amount, chemists often us e parts per million, parts per billion or parts per trillion to describe dilute
concentrations.
Parts per Million: A concentration of a solution that contained 1 g sol ute and 1000000 mL solution (same as 1 mg solute and 1
L solution) would create a very small percentage concentrat ion. Because a solution like this would be so dilute, the dens ity of
the solution is well approximated by the density of the s olvent; for water that is 1 g/mL (but would be different for different
solvents). So, after doing the math and converting the mi lliliters of solution into grams of solution (assuming wa ter is the
solvent):
We get (1 g solute)/(1000000 g solution). Because both t he solute and the solution are both now expressed in term s of grams, it
could now be said that the solute concentration is 1 pa rt per million (ppm).
The ppm unit can also be used in terms of volume/volume (v/v) instead (see example below).
Parts per Billion: Parts per billion (ppb) is almost like ppm, except 1 ppb is 1000-fold more dilute than 1 ppm.

2.1.1.1.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/338506Parts per Trillion: Just like ppb, the idea behind parts per trillion (ppt) is similar to that of ppm. However, 1 ppt is 1000-fold
more dilute than 1 ppb and 1000000-fold more dilute t han 1 ppm.
Here is a table with the volume percent of different gases found in air. V olume percent means that for 100 L of air, there are
78.084 L Nitrogen, 20.946 L Oxygen, 0.934 L Argon and so on; V olume percent mass is different from the compo sition by
mass or composition by amount of moles.
Elements Name Volume Percent (v/v) ppm (v/v)
Nitrogen 78.084 780,840
Oxygen 20.946 209,460
Water Vapor 4.0% 40,000
Argon 0.934 9,340
Carbon Dioxide 0.0379 379* (but growing rapidly)
Neon 0.008 8.0
Helium 0.000524 5.24
Methane 0.00017 1.7
Krypton 0.000114 1.14
Ozone 0.000001 0.1
Dinitrogen Monoxide 0.00003 0.305
Concentration Units based on moles
Mole Fraction: The mole fraction of a substance is the fraction of all of its molecules (or atoms) out of the total number of
molecules (or atoms). It can also come in handy sometimes when dealing with the equation.
Also, keep in mind that the sum of each of the solution's subst ances' mole fractions equals 1.
Mole Percent: The mole percent (of substance A) is in percent form.
Molarity: The molarity (M) of a solution is used to represent the amo unt of moles of solute per liter of the solution.
Molality: The molality (m) of a solution is used to represent the am ount of moles of solute per kilogram of the solvent.Example: ppm in the Atmosphere

2.1.1.1.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/338506
Figure: Different molarities of liquids in the laborat ory. 50 ml of distilled water (0 M), Sodium Hydroxid e solution of 0.1 M, and
Hydrochloric acid solution of 0.1 M. from group4swimm ingpool.
The molarity and molality equations differ only from their denominators. However, this is a huge difference. As you may
remember, volume varies with different temperatures. At higher temperatures, volumes of liquids increase, whil e at lower
temperatures, volumes of liquids decrease. Therefore, molarities of solutions also vary at different temp eratures. This creates an
advantage for using molality over molarity. Using mola lities rather than molarities for lab experiments woul d best keep the results
within a closer range. Because volume is not a part of its e quation, it makes molality independent of temperature.
Practice Problems
1. In a solution, there is 111.0 mL (110.605 g) solvent an d 5.24 mL (6.0508 g) solute present in a solution. Find the mass percent,
volume percent and mass/volume percent of the solute.
2. With the solution shown in the picture below, find the mole percent of substance C.
3. A 1.5L solution is composed of 0.25g NaCl dissolved in water. Find its molarity.
4. 0.88g NaCl is dissolved in 2.0L water. Find its molality.
Solutions
1:
Mass Percent
=(Mass of Solute) / (Mass of Solution) x 100%|
=(6.0508g) / (110.605g + 6.0508g) x 100%
=(0.0518688312) x 100%
=5.186883121%
Mass Percent= 5.186%
V olume Percent
=(V olume of Solute) / (V olume of Solution) x 100%
=(5.24mL) / (111.0mL + 5.24mL) x 100%
=(0.0450791466) x 100%

2.1.1.1.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/338506=4.507914659%
Volume Percent= 4.51%
Mass/V olume Percent
=(Mass of Solute) / (V olume of Solution) x 100%
=(6.0508g) / (111.0mL + 5.24mL) x 100%
=(0.0520) x 100%
=5.205%
Mass/Volume Percent= 5.2054%
2. Moles of C= (5 C molecules) x (1mol C / 6.022x10 C molec ules) = 8.30288941x10 mol C
Total Moles= (24 molecules) x (1mol / 6.022x10 molecules)= 3.98538691x10 mol total
X = (8.30288941x10 mol C) / (3.98538691x10 mol) =.20833333 33
Mole Percent of C
= X x 100%
=(o.2083333333) x 100%
=20.83333333
Mole Percent of C = 20%
3. Moles of NaCl= (0.25g) / (22.99g + 35.45g) = 0.004277 mol NaC l
Molarity
=(Moles of Solute) / (Liters of Solution)
=(0.004277mol NaCl) / (1.5L)
=0.002851 M
Molarity= 0.0029M
4. Moles of NaCl= (0.88g) / (22.99g + 35.45g) = 0.01506 mol NaCl
Mass of water= (2.0L) x (1000mL / 1L) x (1g / 1mL) x (1kg / 1000g) = 2.0kg water
Molality
=(Moles of Solute) / (kg of Solvent)
=(0.01506 mol NaCl) / (2.0kg)
=0.0075290897m
Molality= 0.0075m
References
1. Petrucci, Harwood, Herring. General Chemistry: Principles & Modern Applications. 8th ed. Upper Saddle River, New Jersey:
Pearson/Prentice Hall, 2002. 528-531
Contributors and Attributions
Christian Rae Figueroa (UCD)
2.1.1.1: Units of Concentration is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.23 -24
23 -23
C-24 -23
C

2.1.2.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1699642.1.2: Precipitation and Solubility Rules
Predict the solubility of common inorganic compounds by usi ng solubility rules
Write simple net ionic equations for precipitation react ions.
Precipitation Reactions and Solubility Rules
A precipitation reaction is one in which dissolved s ubstances react to form one (or more) solid product s. Many reactions of this
type involve the exchange of ions between ionic comp ounds in aqueous solution and are sometimes referred to as double
displacement, double replacement, or metathesis reactions. These reactions are common in nature and are responsible for the
formation of coral reefs in ocean waters and kidney stones in animals. They are used widely in industry for production of a number
of commodity and specialty chemicals. Precipitation re actions also play a central role in many chemical a nalysis techniques,
including spot tests used to identify metal ions and gravimetric methods for determining the composition of matter (see the last
module of this chapter).
The extent to which a substance may be dissolved in wat er, or any solvent, is quantitatively expressed as it s solubility, defined as
the maximum concentration of a substance that can be achieved under specified conditions. Substances with re latively large
solubilities are said to be soluble. A substance will precipitate when solution conditions are such that it s concentration exceeds its
solubility. Substances with relatively low solubilities are said to be insoluble, and these are the substan ces that readily precipitate
from solution. More information on these important c oncepts is provided in the text chapter on solutions. Fo r purposes of
predicting the identities of solids formed by precipi tation reactions, one may simply refer to patterns of solubility that have been
observed for many ionic compounds (Table).
All compounds that contain the cations Na, K or NH, or the anions NO or C H O are soluble in water. It is best to
memorize these. Beyond this, solubilities are normally classified using the anion in the compound. Here are the rules that you will
use in Chem 101A:
Table: Solubility Rules for Common Ionic Compounds in Water
An anion from this
column......combined with a cation from this column
produces a soluble compound (a precipitate will
NOT form)... combined with a cation from this column produces an
insoluble compound (a precipitate will form)
NO, C H O All None
Cl, Br, I Most Ag Pb Hg
SO MostAg Pb Hg
Ca Sr Ba (the heavier IIA elements)
OHNa K
(NH reacts with OH: see below)
BaAll others
(note: Ag forms an oxide product, rather than hydroxid e
product)
CO, PO Na K NH All others
SNa K NH
Mg Ca Sr Ba (group IIA)All others
(the reactions of sulfide with 3+ ions are not simple
precipitations: you do not need to know these)
Note that the reaction of Ag with OH produces Ag O (and wat er), not AgOH. This is a “quirk” of the chemistry of silv er ions.
The net ionic equation for this reaction is:Learning Objectives
+ +4+3–2 3 2–
3–2 3 2–
– – – + 2+22+
42–+ 2+22+
2+ 2+ 2+
4+ –
2++
32–43– + +4+
2–+ +4+
2+ 2+ 2+ 2+
+ –2

2.1.2.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169964Note that ammonia (NH) dissolves in water to produce a small concentration of hydroxide ions (discussed in a later section.) The
resulting hydroxide ions can participate in precipitati on reactions. Here is an example, using Mg:
Note that the above equation is written in terms of the major species in solution (NH and H O) as opposed to t he minor species
(NH + and OH-).
A vivid example of precipitation is observed when so lutions of potassium iodide and lead nitrate are mixe d, resulting in the
formation of solid lead iodide. This observation is consistent with the solubility guidelines given abo ve: The only insoluble
combination among all those possible is lead and iodide. The net ionic equation representing this reaction is:
Lead iodide is a bright yellow solid that was formerly used as an artist’s pigment known as iodine yellow (Figu re). The
properties of pure PbI crystals make them useful for fabri cation of X-ray and gamma ray detectors.
Figure: A precipitate of PbI forms when solutions cont aining Pb and I are mixed. (credit: Der Kreole/Wikim edia
Commons)
The solubility guidelines in Table may be used to p redict whether a precipitation reaction will occur whe n solutions of
soluble ionic compounds are mixed together. One merel y needs to identify all the ions present in the solu tion and then consider if
possible cation/anion pairing could result in an inso luble compound. For example, mixing solutions of silve r nitrate and sodium
chloride will yield a solution containing Ag,, Na, and Cl ions. Aside from the two ionic compounds originally present in
the solutions, AgNO and NaCl, two additional ionic compo unds may be derived from this collection of ions: NaNO and AgCl.
The solubility guidelines indicate all nitrate salt s are soluble but that AgCl is an insoluble combinati on. A precipitation reaction,
therefore, is predicted to occur, as described by the foll owing equation:
Predict the result of mixing reasonably concentrated solutions of the following ionic compounds. If precipita tion is expected,
write a balanced net ionic equation for the reaction.
a. potassium sulfate and barium nitrate
b. lithium chloride and silver acetate
c. lead nitrate and ammonium carbonate
Solution
(a) The two possible products for this combination ar e KNO and BaSO. The solubility guidelines indicate BaSO is
insoluble, and so a precipitation reaction is expecte d. The net ionic equation for this reaction, derive d in the manner detailed in
the previous module, is3
2+
3 2
22+ −
3 3
Example: Predicting Precipitation Products
3 4 4

2.1.2.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169964(b) The two possible products for this combination are LiC H O and AgCl. The solubility guidelines indicate Ag Cl is
insoluble, and so a precipitation reaction is expecte d. The net ionic equation for this reaction, derive d in the manner detailed in
the previous module, is
(c) The two possible products for this combination are PbCO and NH NO. The solubility guidelines indicate PbCO is
insoluble, and so a precipitation reaction is expecte d. The net ionic equation for this reaction, derive d in the manner detailed in
the previous module, is
Which solution could be used to precipitate the bari um ion, Ba, in a water sample: sodium chloride, sodium hydroxide, or
sodium sulfate? What is the formula for the expected pre cipitate?
Answer
sodium sulfate, BaSO
Glossary
insoluble
of relatively low solubility; dissolving only to a slight e xtent
precipitate
insoluble product that forms from reaction of soluble reac tants
precipitation reaction
reaction that produces one or more insoluble products; whe n reactants are ionic compounds, sometimes called double displacement or metathesis
salt
ionic compound that can be formed by the reaction of an acid with a base that contains a cation and an anion other than
hydroxide or oxide
soluble
of relatively high solubility; dissolving to a relati vely large extent
solubility
the extent to which a substance may be dissolved in water, or a ny solvent
Contributors and Attributions
Paul Flowers (University of North Carolina - Pembroke), Kla us Theopold (University of Delaware) and Richard Langl ey
(Stephen F. Austin State University) with contributing au thors. Textbook content produced by OpenStax College i s licensed
under a Creative Commons Attribution License 4.0 license. Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/85abf1932bd...a7ac8df6@9.110).
2.1.2: Precipitation and Solubility Rules is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.2 3 2
3 4 3 3
Exercise
2+

2.1.3.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1699652.1.3: Acid-Base Reactions
Acid-Base Reactions
An acid-base reaction is one in which a hydrogen ion, H, is transferred from one chemical species to another. Such reactions are of
central importance to numerous natural and technolo gical processes, ranging from the chemical transforma tions that take place
within cells and the lakes and oceans, to the industria l-scale production of fertilizers, pharmaceuticals, and o ther substances
essential to society. The subject of acid-base chemis try, therefore, is worthy of thorough discussion, and a full chapter is devoted to
this topic later in the text.
For purposes of this brief introduction, we will consid er only the more common types of acid-base reaction s that take place in
aqueous solutions. In this context, an acid is a substanc e that will dissolve in water to yield hydronium ions, H O. As an example,
consider the equation shown here:
The process represented by this equation confirms tha t hydrogen chloride is an acid. When dissolved in wat er, H O ions are
produced by a chemical reaction in which H ions are tran sferred from HCl molecules to H O molecules (Figure).
Figure: When hydrogen chloride gas dissolves in water, (a) it reacts as an acid, transferring protons to water molecules to
yield (b) hydronium ions (and solvated chloride ions)
The nature of HCl is such that its reaction with water as just described is essentially 100% efficient: Vi rtually every HCl molecule
that dissolves in water will undergo this reaction. Aci ds that completely react in this fashion are called strong acids, and HCl is one
among just a handful of common acid compounds that are classified as strong (Table). A far greater num ber of compounds
behave as weak acids and only partially react with wate r, leaving a large majority of dissolved molecules i n their original form and
generating a relatively small amount of hydronium io ns. Weak acids are commonly encountered in nature, b eing the substances
partly responsible for the tangy taste of citrus fru its, the stinging sensation of insect bites, and the unp leasant smells associated with
body odor. A familiar example of a weak acid is acetic acid, the main ingredient in food vinegars:
When dissolved in water under typical conditions, on ly about 1% of acetic acid molecules are present in the ionized form,
(Figure). (The use of a double-arrow in the equatio n above denotes the partial reaction aspect of this process, a
concept addressed fully in the chapters on chemical equi librium.)+
3+
3+
+2

2.1.3.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169965
Figure: (a) Fruits such as oranges, lemons, and grapefrui t contain the weak acid citric acid. (b) Vinegars co ntain the weak
acid acetic acid. (credit a: modification of work b y Scott Bauer; credit b: modification of work by Brü cke-Osteuropa/Wikimedia
Commons)
Table: Common Strong Acids
Compound Formula Name in Aqueous Solution
HBr hydrobromic acid
HCl hydrochloric acid
HI hydroiodic acid
HNO nitric acid
HClO perchloric acid
H SO sulfuric acid
A base is a substance that will dissolve in water to y ield hydroxide ions, OH. The most common bases are ion ic compounds
composed of alkali or alkaline earth metal cations (g roups 1 and 2) combined with the hydroxide ion—for e xample, NaOH and
Ca(OH). When these compounds dissolve in water, hydroxi de ions are released directly into the solution. For example, KOH and
Ba(OH) dissolve in water and dissociate completely to p roduce cations (K and Ba, respectively) and hydroxi de ions, OH.
These bases, along with other hydroxides that completely di ssociate in water, are considered strong bases.
Consider as an example the dissolution of lye (sodium hydro xide) in water:
This equation confirms that sodium hydroxide is a bas e. When dissolved in water, NaOH dissociates to yield Na a nd OH ions.
This is also true for any other ionic compound conta ining hydroxide ions. Since the dissociation process i s essentially complete
when ionic compounds dissolve in water under typical conditions, NaOH and other ionic hydroxides are all cla ssified as strong
bases.
Unlike ionic hydroxides, some compounds produce hydrox ide ions when dissolved by chemically reacting with wate r molecules.
In all cases, these compounds react only partially and so are classified as weak bases. These types of c ompounds are also abundant
in nature and important commodities in various techn ologies. For example, global production of the weak b ase ammonia is
typically well over 100 metric tons annually, being wi dely used as an agricultural fertilizer, a raw materia l for chemical synthesis of
other compounds, and an active ingredient in househ old cleaners (Figure). When dissolved in water, ammoni a reacts
partially to yield hydroxide ions, as shown here:
This is, by definition, an acid-base reaction, in this case involving the transfer of H ions from water mol ecules to ammonia
molecules. Under typical conditions, only about 1% of the dissolved ammonia is present as ions.3
2 4
2+ 2+ −

2.1.3.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169965
Figure: Ammonia is a weak base used in a variety of ap plications. (a) Pure ammonia is commonly applied as an agricultural
fertilizer. (b) Dilute solutions of ammonia are effec tive household cleansers. (credit a: modification of w ork by National Resources
Conservation Service; credit b: modification of work by pat00139)
The chemical reactions described in which acids and b ases dissolved in water produce hydronium and hydroxide ions, respectively,
are, by definition, acid-base reactions. In these reac tions, water serves as both a solvent and a reactant. A neutralization reaction is a
specific type of acid-base reaction in which the rea ctants are an acid and a base, the products are often a salt and water, and neither
reactant is the water itself:
To illustrate a neutralization reaction, consider what happens when a typical antacid such as milk of magne sia (an aqueous
suspension of solid Mg(OH)) is ingested to ease symptoms associa ted with excess stomach acid (HCl):
Note that in addition to water, this reaction produces a salt, magnesium chloride.
Write balanced chemical equations for the acid-base re actions described here:
a. the weak acid hydrogen hypochlorite reacts with water
b. a solution of barium hydroxide is neutralized with a solut ion of nitric acid
Solution
(a) The two reactants are provided, HOCl and H O. Since the substance is reported to be an acid, its reaction with water will
involve the transfer of H from HOCl to H O to generate hydr onium ions, H O and hypochlorite ions, OCl.
A double-arrow is appropriate in this equation because it indicates the HOCl is a weak acid that has not reacted comple tely.
(b) The two reactants are provided, Ba(OH) and HNO. Since this is a neutralization reaction, the two products will be water
and a salt composed of the cation of the ionic hydr oxide (Ba) and the anion generated when the acid tra nsfers its hydrogen
ion.
Write the net ionic equation representing the neutr alization of any strong acid with an ionic hydroxide. (Hint: Consider the ions
produced when a strong acid is dissolved in water.)
Answer
2.1.3: Acid-Base Reactions is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.2
Example: Writing Equations for Acid-Base Reactions
2 3+ −
2 3
2+
Exercise

2.1.4.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1699662.1.4: Other Common Reactions
Predict the formation of a weak electrolyte from its cons tituent ions.
Write the net ionic equation for the formation of a weak e lectrolyte.
Predict the formation of carbon dioxide gas from the react ion of carbonate or bicarbonate ions with acid.
Constituent Ions will Associate to form Weak Electrolytes
Recall that weak electrolytes are solutes where only a small percentage of the molecules present dissociate into ions when
dissolved in water. We call this partial dissociation. Alternatively, because most of the ions remain associa ted, we could describe
the solution of a weak electrolyte as mostly molecular. Either way we describe it, the behavior is consisten t. The constituent ions of
a weak electrolyte tend are strongly attracted to on e another. Therefore, if you mix solutions containing the constituent ions of a
weak electrolyte, the ions will associate (the opposite of dis sociate) and the major product will be the weak electroly te.
For example, weak acids--weak electrolytes, by definitio n--will be formed whenever their constituent ions are mixed. Here are two
examples:
Mixing solutions of HCl and KC H O, the major product will be acet ic acid, HC H O.
Mixing solutions of HNO and NaF, the major product will be hy drofluoric acid, HF.
You have been given one example of a weak base, ammon ia. Recognize that combining the ions ammonium (NH) a nd hydroxide
(OH) will result in the formation of the weak electrolyte, am monia (NH). Here is an example:
Mixing solutions of NaNH4 and KOH, the major product will be amm onia, NH.
Special Reactions of Carbonate and Bicarbonate Ions
Carbonate ion and bicarbonate ion react with excess H to form H CO (carbonic acid, a weak electrolye). Howe ver, carbonic acid
can only exist at very low concentrations. Under normal circumstances, carbonic acid decomposes into CO and H O. Therefore,
carbon dioxide and water are the normal products when ever carbonate or bicarbonate react with excess acid. Here are some
examples:
Mixing solutions of NaHCO and HCl:
step 1:
step 2:
Or, overall:
Adding a solution of HCl to solid CaCO (with the acid in ex cess):
step 1:
step 2:Learning Objectives
2 3 2 2 3 2
4+
-3
+2 3
2 2

2.1.4.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169966step 3:
Overall:
Mixing solutions of HC H O and K CO (with the acid in excess):
step 1:
step 2:
step 3:
Overall:
You can see an example of this kind of reaction for yourself by mixing baking soda (NaHCO) and vinegar (a solution of acetic
acid) in your kitchen. The mixture will bubble vigorously as gaseous carbon dioxide forms.
2.1.4: Other Common Reactions is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.2 3 2 2 3

2.1.5.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1699672.1.5: Writing Net Ionic Equations
Identify what species are really present in an aqueous soluti on.
Identify possible products: insoluble ionic compound, wat er, weak electrolyte
Write net ionic equations for reactions that occur in a queous solution.
WRITING NET IONIC EQUATIONS FOR CHEM 101A
Chemical reactions that occur in solution are most c oncisely described by writing net ionic equations. A net ionic equation is the
most accurate representation of the actual chemical process that occurs. Writing these equations requires a familiarity with
solubility rules, acid-base reactivity, weak electrolyt es and special reactions of carbonates and bicarbona tes. The following is the
strategy we suggest following for writing net ionic equatio ns in Chem 101A.
Step 1: Identify the species that are actually present, ac counting for the dissociation of any strong electrol ytes. (Insoluble ionic
compounds do not ionize, but you must consider the po ssibility that the ions in an insoluble compound mig ht still be involved in
the reaction.)
Step 2: Identify the products that will be formed when the r eactants are combined. The most common products are insoluble ionic
compounds and water. See the "reactivity of inorganic compo unds" handout for more information.
Step 3: Write the balanced equation for the reaction you i dentified in step 2, being certain to show the major s pecies in your
equation. This is the net ionic equation for the reactio n.

Write a net ionic equation to describe the reaction that occurs when 0.100 M K PO solution is mixed with 0.10 0 M Ca(NO)
solution

Step 1: The species that are present are:
From the
K POFrom the
Ca(NO)
K Ca
PO NO
Step 2: There are two possible combinations of ions here: K + NO (forming KNO) and Ca + PO (forming Ca (PO)).
We know from the general solubility rules that Ca (PO) is an insoluble compound, so it will be formed. KNO is wate rsoluble, so it will not form.
Step 3: The reaction is the combination of calcium and phos phate ions to form calcium phosphate. The balanced equ ation for
this reaction is:
Learning Objectives
Example: Writing Net Ionic Equations
3 4 3 2
3 4 3 2
+ 2+
43-3+3-32+43-3 4 2
3 4 2 3

2.1.5.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169967Write a net ionic equation to describe the reaction that occurs when 0.1 M HC H O solution is mixed with 0.1 M KOH
solution
Step 1: The species that are present are:
From the HC H O From the KOH
H K
C H O OH
Acetic acid, HC H O, is a weak acid. Think of the acid molecules a s “potential” H and C H O ions, however, these
“potential” ions are held together by a covalent bond. A small pe rcentage of the acid molecules do actually ionize (break
apart into ions) when they dissolve in water, but most of the weak acid mo lecules do not ionize.
Step 2: Reaction of an acid (source of H) and a base (sourc e of OH) will form water. The H from the HC H O can combi ne
with the OH to form H O. Note that KC H O is a water-soluble compo und, so it will not form.
Step 3: In order to form water as a product, the covalent bo nd between the H and the C H O ions must break. The H an d
OH will form water. The acetate ion is released when the covalent bond breaks. Remember to show the major species that
exist in solution when you write your equation. Most of the acid molecules are not ionized, so you m ust write out the
complete formula of the acid in your equation. The balan ced equation for this reaction is:
Write a net ionic equation to describe the reaction that occurs when solid Mg(OH) and excess 0.1 M HCl solution
Step 1: The species that are present are:
From the Mg(OH) solid From the HCl
Mg H
OH Cl
Notice that the magnesium hydroxide is a solid; it is not water soluble. The magnesium ions and the hydroxide ions will
remain held together by ionic bonds even if they are in the prese nce of polar water molecules. However, these individual
ions must be considered as possible reactants. Think of the solid ioni c compound as a possible source of Mg and OH
ions. If a chemical reaction is possible, the ionic bonds between Mg and OH will break.
Step 2: Reaction of an acid (source of H) and a base (sourc e of OH) will form water. The H from the HCl can combin e with
the OH from the solid Mg(OH) to form H O. Note that MgCl is a wat er-soluble compound, so it will not form.
Step 3: In order to form water as a product, the ionic bond between the magnesium and hydroxide ions must break. The OH
and H will form water. The magnesium ion is released into solution when the ionic bond breaks. Remember to show the
major species that exist in solution when you write your equatio n. The magnesium hydroxide is a solid reactant, so you
must write out the complete formula in your equation. The balanced equation for this reaction is:Example: Writing Net Ionic Equations
2 3 2
2 3 2
2 3 2- 2 3 2+
2 3 2–
2 3 2
2 2 3 2
+2 3 2– +
Example: Writing Net Ionic Equations
2+ +
- 2+ –
2+ –
–2 2 2

2.1.5.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169967Write a net ionic equation to describe the reaction that occurs when 0.1 M KHCO solution is mixed with excess 0.1 M HNO
solution
Step 1: The species that are present are:
From the KHCO From the HNO
K H
HCO NO
Step 2: From the “reactivity of inorganic compounds” handout, we know that when carbonate or bicarbonate ions react with
acids, carbon dioxide and water are the normal products. Be sure to refer to the handout for details of this process.
Step 3: The reaction is the combination of bicarbonate ion s and hydrogen ions that will first form carbonic aci d (H CO).
However, carbonic acid can only exist at very low conce ntrations. Under normal circumstances, carbonic acid de composes into
CO and H O. The balanced equation for this reaction is:
For each of the following, write the net ionic equatio n for the reaction that will occur when the two substa nces are mixed. If no
reaction occurs, write “no reaction.” Note: the reactions are grouped according to the dif ficulty that typical students have with
them—our groupings may not match your own experience and abil ity. (Answers are available below.)
Easy reactions:
1) 0.1 M AgNO and 0.1 M KBr
2) 0.1 M CaCl and 0.1 M NaNO
3) 0.1 M Fe(NO) and 0.1 M Na CO
4) 0.1 M KOH and 0.1 M CoBr
5) 0.1 M HNO and 0.1 M Ba(OH)
6) 0.1 M Pb(NO) and 0.1 M MgSO
7) 0.1 M Na S and 0.1 M MnI
8) 0.1 M K PO and 0.1 M CuCl
9) 0.1 M HCl and 0.1 M NaC H O
10) 0.1 M NiSO and 0.1 M FeCl
Harder reactions:
1) 0.1 M HC H O and 0.1 M KOH
2) 0.1 M NH and 0.1 M HBr
3) 1 M HCl and solid Mn(OH)
4) excess 1 M HNO and solid AlPO
5) 0.1 M AgNO and 0.1 M NaOH
6) 0.1 M HClO and 0.1 M Ba(OH) (no precipitate forms)
Still harder reactions:
1) 0.1 M Na HPO and 0.1 M HI (equal volumes)Example: Writing Net Ionic Equations
3 3
3 3
3-32 3
2 2
Supplemental Exercises: Writing Net Ionic Equations
2 3
3 3 2 3
3 2
3 2 4
2 2
3 4 2
2 3 2
4 3
2 3 2
3 4
2 4

2.1.5.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1699672) 0.1 M NH and 0.1 M Fe(NO)
3) 0.1 M NaHCO and 0.1 M HCl
4) 0.1 M K CO and 0.1 M HNO (equal volumes)
5) 0.1 M H PO and 0.1 M NH (equal volumes)
Very tricky reactions:
1) 0.1 M AgNO and 0.1 M NH
2) solid BaCO and excess 2 M HC H O
3) solid Cu(OH) and 1 M H SO (equal numbers of moles)
4) solid Ag O and excess 2 M HCl
5) 0.1 M H PO and excess 1 M KOH
AnswerS TO NET IONIC EQUATIONS PRACTICE PROBLEMS
Easy reactions:
1) Ag (aq) + Br (aq) --> AgBr(s)
2) no reaction
3) 2 Fe (aq) + 3 CO (aq) --> Fe (CO) (s)
4) 2 OH (aq) + Co (aq) --> Co(OH) (s)
5) H (aq) + OH (aq) --> H O(l)
6) Pb (aq) + SO (aq) --> PbSO (s)
7) S (aq) + Mn (aq) --> MnS(s)
8) 2 PO (aq) + 3 Cu (aq) --> Cu (PO) (s)
9) H (aq) + C H O (aq) --> HC H O (aq)
10) no reaction
Harder reactions:
1) HC H O (aq) + OH (aq) --> C H O (aq) + H O(l)
2) NH (aq) + H (aq) --> NH (aq)
3) 2 H (aq) + Mn(OH) (s) --> Mn (aq) + 2 H O(l)
4) 3 H (aq) + AlPO (s) --> Al (aq) + H PO (aq)
5) 2 Ag (aq) + 2 OH (aq) --> Ag O(s) + H O(l)
6) HClO(aq) + OH (aq) --> ClO (aq) + H O(l)
Still harder reactions:
1) HPO (aq) + H (aq) --> H PO (aq)
2) Fe (aq) + 2 NH (aq) + 2 H O(l) --> Fe(OH) (s) + 2 NH (aq)
3) HCO (aq) + H (aq) --> H O(l) + CO (g)
4) CO (aq) + H (aq) --> HCO (aq)
5) H PO (aq) + NH (aq) --> H PO (aq) + NH (aq)
Very tricky reactions:
1) 2 Ag (aq) + 2 NH (aq) + H O(l) --> Ag O(s) + 2 NH (aq)3 3 2
2 3 3
3 4 3
3 3
3 2 3 2
2 2 4
3 4
3+
32–
2 3 3
– 2+2
+ –2
2+42–4
2– 2+
43– 2+3 4 2
+2 3 2–2 3 2
2 3 2–2 3 2–2
3+
4+
+22+2
+43+3 4
+ –2 2
– –2
42– +2 4–
2+
3 2 2 4+
3– +2 2
32– +3–
3 4 3 2 4–4+
+3 2 2 4+

2.1.5.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1699672) BaCO (s) + 2 HC H O (aq) --> Ba (aq) + 2 C H O (aq) + H O(l) + CO (g)
3) Cu(OH) (s) + H (aq) + HSO (aq) --> Cu (aq) + 2 H O(l) + SO (aq)
4) Ag O(s) + 2 H (aq) + 2 Cl (aq) --> 2 AgCl(s) + H O(l)
5) Three reactions will occur, one after the other:
H PO (aq) + OH (aq) --> H PO (aq) + H O(l)
H PO (aq) + OH (aq) --> HPO (aq) + H O(l)
HPO (aq) + OH (aq) --> PO (aq) + H O(l)
2.1.5: Writing Net Ionic Equations is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.3 2 3 22+2 3 2–2 2
2+4– 2+2 42–
2+ –2
3 4–
2 4–
2 4– –42–2
42– –43–2

2.1.6.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1699682.1.6: Concentration of Solutions
To describe the concentrations of solutions quantitative ly
Many people have a qualitative idea of what is meant b y concentration. Anyone who has made instant coffee or lemonade knows
that too much powder gives a strongly flavored, highl y concentrated drink, whereas too little results in a dilute solution that may be
hard to distinguish from water. In chemistry, the conc entration of a solution is the quantity of a solute that is contained in a
particular quantity of solvent or solution. Knowing the concentration of solutes is im portant in controlling the stoichiometry of
reactants for solution reactions. Chemists use many diff erent methods to define concentrations, some of which are described in this
section.
Molarity
The most common unit of concentration is molarity, which is also the most useful for calculations invol ving the stoichiometry of
reactions in solution. The molarity (M) is defined as the number of moles of solute present in exactly 1 L of solution. It is,
equivalently, the number of millimoles of solute present in exactly 1 mL of solution:
The units of molarity are therefore moles per liter of solution (mol/L), abbreviated as. An aqueous solu tion that contains 1 mol
(342 g) of sucrose in enough water to give a final vol ume of 1.00 L has a sucrose concentration of 1.00 mo l/L or 1.00 M. In
chemical notation, square brackets around the name or formula of the solute represent the molar concentr ation of a solute.
Therefore,
is read as “the concentration of sucrose is 1.00 mola r.” The relationships between volume, molarity, and mo les may be expressed as
either
or
Figure illustrates the use of Equations and.
Figure: Preparation of a Solution of Known Concentration Using a Solid SoluteLearning Objectives

2.1.6.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169968Calculate the number of moles of sodium hydroxide (NaOH) in 2.50 L of 0.100 M NaOH.
Given: identity of solute and volume and molarity of solution
Asked for: amount of solute in moles
Strategy:
Use either Equation or Equation, depending on the unit s given in the problem.
Solution:
Because we are given the volume of the solution in l iters and are asked for the number of moles of subst ance, Equation
is more useful:
Calculate the number of millimoles of alanine, a biologic ally important molecule, in 27.2 mL of 1.53 M alanine.
Answer
41.6 mmol
Concentrations are also often reported on a mass-to -mass (m/m) basis or on a mass-to-volume (m/v) basis, particularly in clinical
laboratories and engineering applications. A concentr ation expressed on an m/m basis is equal to the num ber of grams of solute per
gram of solution; a concentration on an m/v basis i s the number of grams of solute per milliliter of solu tion. Each measurement can
be expressed as a percentage by multiplying the rati o by 100; the result is reported as percent m/m or p ercent m/v. The
concentrations of very dilute solutions are often e xpressed in parts per million (ppm), which is grams of solute per 10 g of
solution, or in parts per billion (ppb), which is grams of solute per 10 g of solution. For aqueous solutions at 20°C, 1 ppm
corresponds to 1 μg per milliliter, and 1 ppb correspo nds to 1 ng per milliliter. These concentrations and their units are summarized
in Table.
Table: Common Units of Concentration
Concentration Units
m/m g of solute/g of solution
m/v g of solute/mL of solution
ppmg of solute/10 g of solution
μg/mL
ppbg of solute/10 g of solution
ng/mL
The Preparation of Solutions
To prepare a solution that contains a specified con centration of a substance, it is necessary to dissolve t he desired number of moles
of solute in enough solvent to give the desired fin al volume of solution. Figure illustrates this proce dure for a solution of
cobalt(II) chloride dihydrate in ethanol. Note that the volume of the solvent is not specified. Because the solute occupies space in
the solution, the volume of the solvent needed is alm ost always less than the desired volume of solution. For example, if the desired
volume were 1.00 L, it would be incorrect to add 1.00 L of water to 342 g of sucrose because that would prod uce more than 1.00 L
of solution. As shown in Figure, for some substances this effect can be significant, especially for concentrat ed solutions.Example: Calculating Moles from Concentration of NaOH
Exercise: Calculating Moles from Concentration of Alanine

2.1.6.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169968
Figure: Preparation of 250 mL of a Solution of (NH) C r O in Water. The solute occupies space in the solution, so less than
250 mL of water are needed to make 250 mL of solutio n.
The solution contains 10.0 g of cobalt(II) chloride dihydrate, CoCl •2H O, in enough ethanol to make exactl y 500 mL of
solution. What is the molar concentration of?
Given: mass of solute and volume of solution
Asked for: concentration (M)
Strategy:
To find the number of moles of, divide the mass of the compound by its molar mass. Calculate the molari ty of the
solution by dividing the number of moles of solute by t he volume of the solution in liters.
Solution:
The molar mass of CoCl •2H O is 165.87 g/mol. Therefore,
The volume of the solution in liters is
Molarity is the number of moles of solute per liter of solu tion, so the molarity of the solution is
The solution shown in Figure contains 90.0 g of (NH) Cr O in enough water to give a final volume of exactly 25 0
mL. What is the molar concentration of ammonium dichroma te?
Answer
To prepare a particular volume of a solution that co ntains a specified concentration of a solute, we first need to calculate the
number of moles of solute in the desired volume of solution using the relationship shown in Equation. We then convert the
number of moles of solute to the corresponding mass of solu te needed. This procedure is illustrated in Example.4 2 2 7
Example
2 2
2 2
Exercise
4 2 2 7

2.1.6.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169968The so-called D5W solution used for the intravenous re placement of body fluids contains 0.310 M glucose. (D5 W is an
approximately 5% solution of dextrose [the medical na me for glucose] in water.) Calculate the mass of gluc ose necessary to
prepare a 500 mL pouch of D5W. Glucose has a molar mass of 180.16 g/mol.
Given: molarity, volume, and molar mass of solute
Asked for: mass of solute
Strategy:
A. Calculate the number of moles of glucose contained in t he specified volume of solution by multiplying the volu me of the
solution by its molarity.
B. Obtain the mass of glucose needed by multiplying the n umber of moles of the compound by its molar mass.
Solution:
A We must first calculate the number of moles of glucose con tained in 500 mL of a 0.310 M solution:
B We then convert the number of moles of glucose to the re quired mass of glucose:
Another solution commonly used for intravenous injecti ons is normal saline, a 0.16 M solution of sodium chlori de in water.
Calculate the mass of sodium chloride needed to prepare 250 mL of normal saline solution.
Answer
2.3 g NaCl
A solution of a desired concentration can also be pr epared by diluting a small volume of a more concent rated solution with
additional solvent. A stock solution is a commercial ly prepared solution of known concentration and is o ften used for this purpose.
Diluting a stock solution is preferred because the al ternative method, weighing out tiny amounts of solut e, is difficult to carry out
with a high degree of accuracy. Dilution is also used to prepare solutions from substances that are sold a s concentrated aqueous
solutions, such as strong acids.
The procedure for preparing a solution of known conce ntration from a stock solution is shown in Figure. It requires
calculating the number of moles of solute desired in the final volume of the more dilute solution and t hen calculating the volume of
the stock solution that contains this amount of solut e. Remember that diluting a given quantity of stock solution with solvent does
not change the number of moles of solute present. The r elationship between the volume and concentration of t he stock solution and
the volume and concentration of the desired diluted sol ution is therefore
where the subscripts s and d indicate the stock and dilute solutions, respectiv ely. Example demonstrates the calculations
involved in diluting a concentrated stock solution.Example: D5W Solution
Exercise

2.1.6.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169968
Figure: Preparation of a Solution of Known Concentrat ion by Diluting a Stock Solution. (a) A volume (V) containing the
desired moles of solute (M) is measured from a stock solut ion of known concentration. (b) The measured volume of stock solution
is transferred to a second volumetric flask. (c) The me asured volume in the second flask is then diluted with solvent up to the
volumetric mark [(V)(M) = (V)(M)].
What volume of a 3.00 M glucose stock solution is necessary to prepare 2500 mL of the D5W solution in Example?
Given: volume and molarity of dilute solution
Asked for: volume of stock solution
Strategy:
A. Calculate the number of moles of glucose contained in t he indicated volume of dilute solution by multiplying th e volume of
the solution by its molarity.
B. To determine the volume of stock solution needed, divide the number of moles of glucose by the molarity of the st ock
solution.
Solution:
A The D5W solution in Example 4.5.3 was 0.310 M glucose. We begin by using Equation 4.5.4 to calculate the numb er of
moles of glucose contained in 2500 mL of the solution:
B We must now determine the volume of the 3.00 M stock solutio n that contains this amount of glucose:
In determining the volume of stock solution that was needed, we had to divide the desired number of moles o f glucose by the
concentration of the stock solution to obtain the a ppropriate units. Also, the number of moles of solute in 258 mL of the stock
solution is the same as the number of moles in 2500 m L of the more dilute solution; only the amount of solvent has changed.
The answer we obtained makes sense: diluting the stock solution about tenfold increases its volume by about a factor of 10
(258 mL → 2500 mL). Consequently, the concentration of the solute must decrease by about a factor of 10, as it does (3.00 M
→ 0.310 M).s
s
s s d d
Example

2.1.6.6 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169968We could also have solved this problem in a single step by solving Equation 4.5.4 for V and substituting the appropriate
values:
As we have noted, there is often more than one correct way to so lve a problem.
What volume of a 5.0 M NaCl stock solution is necessary to prepare 500 mL of normal saline solution (0.16 M NaCl)?
Answer
16 mL
Ion Concentrations in Solution
In Example, the concentration of a solution contai ning 90.00 g of ammonium dichromate in a final volu me of 250 mL were
calculated to be 1.43 M. Let’s consider in more detai l exactly what that means. Ammonium dichromate is an ionic compound that
contains two NH ions and one Cr O ion per formula unit. Like other ionic compounds, it is a strong electrolyte that dissociates
in aqueous solution to give hydrated NH and Cr O ions:
Thus 1 mol of ammonium dichromate formula units disso lves in water to produce 1 mol of Cr O anions and 2 mol of NH
cations (see Figure).
Figure: Dissolution of 1 mol of an Ionic Compound. In this case, dissolving 1 mol of (NH) Cr O produces a soluti on that
contains 1 mol of Cr O ions and 2 mol of NH ions. (Wate r molecules are omitted from a molecular view of the solution for
clarity.)
When carrying out a chemical reaction using a soluti on of a salt such as ammonium dichromate, it is impo rtant to know the
concentration of each ion present in the solution. If a solution contains 1.43 M (NH) Cr O, then the concentr ation of Cr O
must also be 1.43 M because there is one Cr O ion per formula unit. However, there are two NH ions per formula unit, so the
concentration of NH ions is 2 × 1.43 M = 2.86 M. Because e ach formula unit of (NH) Cr O produces three ions when
dissolved in water (2NH + 1Cr O), the total concentration of ions in the solution is 3 × 1.43 M = 4.29 M.
What are the concentrations of all species derived from the solutes in these aqueous solutions?
a. 0.21 M NaOH
b. 3.7 M (CH) CHOH
c. 0.032 M In(NO)
Given: molaritys
Exercise
4+2 72−
4+2 72−
2 72−
4+
4 2 2 7
2 72−
4+
4 2 2 7 2 72−
2 72−4+
4+4 2 2 7
4+2 72−
Example
3 2
3 3

2.1.6.7 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169968Asked for: concentrations
Strategy:
A Classify each compound as either a strong electrolyte or a nonelectrolyte.
B If the compound is a nonelectrolyte, its concentrati on is the same as the molarity of the solution. If the compound is a strong
electrolyte, determine the number of each ion conta ined in one formula unit. Find the concentration of each species by
multiplying the number of each ion by the molarity of the solution.
Solution:
1. Sodium hydroxide is an ionic compound that is a strong electrolyte (and a strong base) in aqueous solution:
B Because each formula unit of NaOH produces one Na ion a nd one OH ion, the concentration of each ion is the sa me as
the concentration of NaOH: [Na] = 0.21 M and [OH] = 0.21 M.
2. A The formula (CH) CHOH represents 2-propanol (isopropyl alcoh ol) and contains the –OH group, so it is an alcohol.
Recall from Section 4.1 that alcohols are covalent compou nds that dissolve in water to give solutions of neutral mol ecules.
Thus alcohols are nonelectrolytes.
B The only solute species in solution is therefore (CH) CHOH mole cules, so [(CH) CHOH] = 3.7 M.
3. A Indium nitrate is an ionic compound that contains In i ons and NO ions, so we expect it to behave like a strong
electrolyte in aqueous solution:
B One formula unit of In(NO) produces one In ion and t hree NO ions, so a 0.032 M In(NO) solution contains 0.03 2
M In and 3 × 0.032 M = 0.096 M NO —that is, [In] = 0.032 M and [NO] = 0.096 M.
What are the concentrations of all species derived from the solutes in these aqueous solutions?
a. 0.0012 M Ba(OH)
b. 0.17 M Na SO
c. 0.50 M (CH) CO, commonly known as acetone
Answer a
Answer b
Answer c
Summary
Solution concentrations are typically expressed as mo larities and can be prepared by dissolving a known mass of solute in a solvent
or diluting a stock solution.+ −
3 2
3 2 3 2
3+3−
3 33+3−3 3
3+3– 3+3−
Exercise
2 4
3 2

2.1.6.8 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169968definition of molarity:
relationship among volume, molarity, and moles:
relationship between volume and concentration of stock and dilute solutio ns:
The concentration of a substance is the quantity of solute present in a given quantity of solution. Concentrations are usua lly
expressed in terms of molarity, defined as the number of moles of solute in 1 L of solution. Solutions of known concentration can
be prepared either by dissolving a known mass of sol ute in a solvent and diluting to a desired final vol ume or by diluting the
appropriate volume of a more concentrated solution (a stock solution) to the desired final volume.
Contributors and Attributions
Modified by Joshua Halpern (Howard University)
2.1.6: Concentration of Solutions is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

2.1.7.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1699692.1.7: Solution Stoichiometry and Chemical Analysis
To use titration methods to analyze solutions quantit atively.
Calculating Moles from Volume
Quantitative calculations involving reactions in solut ion are carried out with masses, however, volumes of solutions of known
concentration are used to determine the number of mo les of reactants. Whether dealing with volumes of soluti ons of reactants or
masses of reactants, the coefficients in the balanced chemical equation give the number of moles of each reactant needed and the
number of moles of each product that can be produce d. An expanded version of the flowchart for stoichiometr ic calculations is
shown in Figure. The balanced chemical equation for the reaction and either the masses of solid reactants and products or
the volumes of solutions of reactants and products ca n be used to determine the amounts of other species, as illustrated in the
following examples.
Figure: An Expanded Flowchart for Stoichiometric Cal culations. Either the masses or the volumes of solutions o f reactants
and products can be used to determine the amounts of o ther species in a balanced chemical equation.
The balanced chemical equation for a reaction and e ither the masses of solid reactants and products or the volumes of solutions
of reactants and products can be used in stoichiometric cal culations.
Gold is extracted from its ores by treatment with an aqueous cyanide solution, which causes a reaction tha t forms the soluble
[Au(CN)] ion. Gold is then recovered by reduction with meta llic zinc according to the following equation:
What mass of gold can be recovered from 400.0 L of a 3.30 × 10 M solution of [Au(CN)]?
Given: chemical equation and molarity and volume of reactant
Asked for: mass of product
Strategy:
A. Check the chemical equation to make sure it is balance d as written; balance if necessary. Then calculate the num ber of
moles of [Au(CN)] present by multiplying the volume of the solution by its concentration.
B. From the balanced chemical equation, use a mole ratio to c alculate the number of moles of gold that can be obtain ed from
the reaction. To calculate the mass of gold recovered, multiply the number of moles of gold by its molar mass.
Solution:
A The equation is balanced as written; proceed to the stoichiometric calculation. Figure is adapted for t his particular
problem as follows:Learning Objectives
Example: Extraction of Gold
2−
−4
2−
2−

2.1.7.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169969
Figure: An Expanded Flowchart for the Stoichiometric Calculation s.
As indicated in the strategy, start by calculating the number of moles of [Au(CN)] present in the solution fr om the volume
and concentration of the [Au(CN)] solution:
B Because the coefficients of gold and the [Au(CN)] io n are the same in the balanced chemical equation, assu ming that Zn(s)
is present in excess, the number of moles of gold prod uced is the same as the number of moles of [Au(CN)] (i.e., 0.132 mol
of Au). The problem asks for the mass of gold that ca n be obtained, so the number of moles of gold must be converted to the
corresponding mass using the molar mass of gold:
At a 2011 market price of over $1400 per troy ounce (31.10 g), this amount of gold is worth $1170.
What mass of solid lanthanum(III) oxalate nonahydrat e [La (C O) •9H O] can be obtained from 650 mL of a 0.0170 M
aqueous solution of LaCl by adding a stoichiometric amo unt of sodium oxalate?
Answer
3.89 g
The compound para -nitrophenol (molar mass = 139 g/mol) reacts with sodi um hydroxide in aqueous solution to generate a
yellow anion via the reaction
Because the amount of para -nitrophenol is easily estimated from the intensity of the yellow color that results when excess
is added, reactions that produce para -nitrophenol are commonly used to measure the activi ty of enzymes, the catalysts
in biological systems. What volume of 0.105 M NaOH must b e added to 50.0 mL of a solution containing 7.20 × 10 g of
para -nitrophenol to ensure that formation of the yellow anion is complete?
Answer
4.93 × 10 L or 49.3 μL2−
2−
2−
2−
Exercise: Lanthanum Oxalate
2 2 4 3 2
Exercise
−4
−5

2.1.7.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169969In Example and Exercises and, the identities of the limiting reactants are apparent: [Au(CN)], LaCl, a nd
para -nitrophenol. When the limiting reactant is not appar ent, it can be determined by comparing the molar amo unts of the reactants
with their coefficients in the balanced chemical equ ation. The only difference is that the volumes and co ncentrations of solutions of
reactants, rather than the masses of reactants, are used to calculate the number of moles of reactants, as illustrated in Example
When aqueous solutions of silver nitrate and potassiu m dichromate are mixed, an exchange reaction occurs, and silver
dichromate is obtained as a red solid. The overall chem ical equation for the reaction is as follows:
What mass of Ag Cr O is formed when 500 mL of 0.17 M are mix ed with 250 mL of 0.57 M AgNO?
Given: balanced chemical equation and volume and concentrat ion of each reactant
Asked for: mass of product
Strategy:
A. Calculate the number of moles of each reactant by mult iplying the volume of each solution by its molarity.
B. Determine which reactant is limiting by dividing the number of moles of each reactant by its stoichiometric coefficient in
the balanced chemical equation.
C. Use mole ratios to calculate the number of moles of prod uct that can be formed from the limiting reactant. Multiply the
number of moles of the product by its molar mass to obtai n the corresponding mass of product.
Solution:
A The balanced chemical equation tells us that 2 mol of AgNO (aq) reacts with 1 mol of K Cr O (aq) to form 1 m ol of
Ag Cr O (s). The first step is to calculate the number of mol es of each reactant in the specified volumes:
B Now determine which reactant is limiting by dividing the num ber of moles of each reactant by its stoichiometric coeff icient:
Because 0.070 < 0.085, we know that is the limiting reactant.
C Each mole of formed requires 2 mol of the limitin g reactant (), so we can obtain only 0.14/2 = 0.070 mol of
. Finally, convert the number of moles of to the correspond ing mass:
The Ag and Cr O ions form a red precipitate of solid, while the and ions remain in solution. (Water
molecules are omitted from molecular views of the soluti ons for clarity.)
Aqueous solutions of sodium bicarbonate and sulfuric acid react to produce carbon dioxide according to t he following
equation:2−3
Example
2 2 7 3
3 2 2 7
2 2 7
+2 72−
Exercise

2.1.7.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169969If 13.0 mL of 3.0 M H SO are added to 732 mL of 0.112 M NaHCO, what mass of CO is produced?
Answer
3.4 g
Determining the Concentration of an Unknown Solution Using a Titration
To determine the amounts or concentrations of substan ces present in a sample, chemists use a combination of chemical reactions
and stoichiometric calculations in a methodology cal led quantitative analysis. Suppose, for example, we know t he identity of a
certain compound in a solution but not its concentra tion. If the compound reacts rapidly and completely with another reactant, we
may be able to use the reaction to determine the co ncentration of the compound of interest. In a titration, a carefully measured
volume of a solution of known concentration, called the titrant, is added to a measured volume of a solut ion containing a compound
whose concentration is to be determined (the unknown). The reaction used in a titration can be an acid–bas e reaction, a
precipitation reaction, or an oxidation–reduction r eaction. In all cases, the reaction chosen for the a nalysis must be fast, complete,
and specific; that is, only the compound of interest should react with the titrant. The equivalence point is reached when a
stoichiometric amount of the titrant has been added—the amount required to react completely with the unknown.
The chemical nature of the species present in the u nknown dictates which type of reaction is most appropr iate and also how to
determine the equivalence point. The volume of titr ant added, its concentration, and the coefficients fro m the balanced chemical
equation for the reaction allow us to calculate the total number of moles of the unknown in the original solution. Because we have
measured the volume of the solution that contains th e unknown, we can calculate the molarity of the unknown substance. This
procedure is summarized graphically here:
Figure: Dimensional Analysis flowchart for titration problems.
The calcium salt of oxalic acid [Ca(O CCO)] is found in the sap and leaves of some vegetables, including s pinach and
rhubarb, and in many ornamental plants. Because oxali c acid and its salts are toxic, when a food such as r hubarb is processed
commercially, the leaves must be removed, and the oxalate c ontent carefully monitored.
The reaction of MnO with oxalic acid (HO CCO H) in acidic a queous solution produces Mn and CO:
Because this reaction is rapid and goes to completio n, potassium permanganate (KMnO) is widely used as a reactant for
determining the concentration of oxalic acid.
Suppose you stirred a 10.0 g sample of canned rhubarb wi th enough dilute H SO (aq) to obtain 127 mL of colorle ss solution.
Because the added permanganate is rapidly consumed, adding small volumes of a 0.0247 M KMnO solution, whic h has a
deep purple color, to the rhubarb extract does not in itially change the color of the extract. When 15.4 mL of the permanganate
solution have been added, however, the solution beco mes a faint purple due to the presence of a slight excess of permanganate.
If we assume that oxalic acid is the only species in solution that reacts with permanganate, what percentag e of the mass of the
original sample was calcium oxalate? The video below d emonstrates the titration when small, measured amoun ts of a known
permaganate solution are added. At the endpoint, the number of moles of permaganate added equals the num ber of moles of
oxalate in the solution, thus determining how many mole s of oxalate we started with.2 4 3 2
Example: Potassium Permanganate
2 2
4−2 22+2
2 4

2.1.7.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169969Given: equation, mass of sample, volume of solution, and molarity and volume of titrant
Asked for: mass percentage of unknown in sample
Strategy:
A. Balance the chemical equation for the reaction using oxidation states.
B. Calculate the number of moles of permanganate consu med by multiplying the volume of the titrant by its mol arity. Then
calculate the number of moles of oxalate in the soluti on by multiplying by the ratio of the coefficients in the balanced
chemical equation. Because calcium oxalate contains a 1: 1 ratio of Ca: O CCO, the number of moles of oxalate in the
solution is the same as the number of moles of calcium oxalat e in the original sample.
C. Find the mass of calcium oxalate by multiplying the num ber of moles of calcium oxalate in the sample by its mo lar mass.
Divide the mass of calcium oxalate by the mass of the sam ple and convert to a percentage to calculate the percenta ge by
mass of calcium oxalate in the original sample.
Solution:
A As in all other problems of this type, the first req uirement is a balanced chemical equation for the rea ction. Using oxidation
states gives
Thus each mole of MnO added consumes 2.5 mol of oxalic aci d.
B Because we know the concentration of permanganate (0.0247 M) and the volume of permanganate solution that was needed
to consume all the oxalic acid (15.4 mL), we can calc ulate the number of moles of MnO consumed. To do this we first
convert the volume in mL to a volume in liters. The n simply multiplying the molarity of the solution b y the volume in liters we
find the number of moles of
The number of moles of oxalic acid, and thus oxalate, present can be calculated from the mole ratio of t he reactants in the
balanced chemical equation. We can abbreviate the tabl e needed to calculate the number of moles of oxalic aci d in the
C The problem asks for the percentage of calcium oxalate by mass in the original 10.0 g s ample of rhubarb, so we need to
know the mass of calcium oxalate that produced 9.50 × 10 mol of oxalic acid. Because calcium oxalate is Ca (O CCO), 1
mol of calcium oxalate gave 1 mol of oxalic acid in the initial acid extraction:
Permanganate Titration EndpointPermanganate Titration Endpoint
2+ −2 2−
4−
4−
−4
2 2

2.1.7.6 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169969The mass of calcium oxalate originally present was thus
The original sample contained 0.122 g of calcium ox alate per 10.0 g of rhubarb. The percentage of calc ium oxalate by mass
was thus
Because the problem asked for the percentage by mass of calcium oxalate in the original sample rather th an for the
concentration of oxalic acid in the extract, we do not need to know th e volume of the oxalic acid solution for this calculatio n.
Glutathione is a low-molecular-weight compound found i n living cells that is produced naturally by the liv er. Health-care
providers give glutathione intravenously to prevent side effects of chemotherapy and to prevent kidney problems after heart
bypass surgery. Its structure is as follows:

Glutathione is found in two forms: one abbreviated as (left) GSH (indicating the presence of an –SH group) and the other
(right) as GSSG (the disulfide form, in which an S–S bond links two glutathione units). The GSH form is easily oxidized to
GSSG with elemental iodine:
A small amount of soluble starch is added as an indic ator. Because starch reacts with excess I to give an i ntense blue color, the
appearance of a blue color indicates that the equivale nce point of the reaction has been reached.
Adding small volumes of a 0.0031 M aqueous solution of I to 194 mL of a solution that contains glutathione and a trace of
soluble starch initially causes no change. After 16.3 mL of iodine solution have been added, however, a pe rmanent pale blue
color appears because of the formation of the starch -iodine complex. What is the concentration of glutat hione in the original
solution?
Answer
5.2 × 10 M
Standard Solutions
In Exercise, the concentration of the titrant (I) was accurately known. The accuracy of any titration a nalysis depends on an
accurate knowledge of the concentration of the titra nt. Most titrants are first standardized; that is, their concentration is measured
by titration with a standard solution, which is a solu tion whose concentration is known precisely. Only pure crystalline compounds
that do not react with water or carbon dioxide are su itable for use in preparing a standard solution. One such compound is
potassium hydrogen phthalate (KHP), a weak monoprotic aci d suitable for standardizing solutions of bases suc h as sodium
hydroxide. The reaction of KHP with NaOH is a simple acid –base reaction. If the concentration of the KHP soluti on is known
accurately and the titration of a NaOH solution with th e KHP solution is carried out carefully, then the conc entration of the NaOH
solution can be calculated precisely. The standardiz ed NaOH solution can then be used to titrate a solution of an acid whose
concentration is unknown.Exercise: Glutathione
−4

2.1.7.7 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169969
Figure: The reaction of KHP with NaOH. As with all acid-base reactions, a salt is formed.
Acid–Base Titrations
Because most common acids and bases are not intensel y colored, a small amount of an acid–base indicator is usually added to
detect the equivalence point in an acid–base titrat ion. The point in the titration at which an indicator changes color is called the
endpoint (the point in a titration at which an indicator changes color). The procedure is illustrated in Examp le.
The structure of vitamin C (ascorbic acid, a monoprotic acid) is as follows:
Figure: Ascorbic acid. The upper figure shows the three-dimensional represent ation of ascorbic acid. Hatched lines
indicate bonds that are behind the plane of the paper, an d wedged lines indicate bonds that are out of the plane of t he paper.
An absence of vitamin C in the diet leads to the diseas e known as scurvy, a breakdown of connective tissue th roughout the
body and of dentin in the teeth. Because fresh fruits and vegetables rich in vitamin C are readily avail able in developed
countries today, scurvy is not a major problem. In th e days of slow voyages in wooden ships, however, scurvy was co mmon.
Ferdinand Magellan, the first person to sail around the world, lost more than 90% of his crew, many to scurvy. Although a diet
rich in fruits and vegetables contains more than eno ugh vitamin C to prevent scurvy, many people take su pplemental doses of
vitamin C, hoping that the extra amounts will help prevent colds and other illness.
Suppose a tablet advertised as containing 500 mg of vi tamin C is dissolved in 100.0 mL of distilled water t hat contains a small
amount of the acid–base indicator bromothymol blue, an indicator that is yellow in acid solution and blu e in basic solution, to
give a yellow solution. The addition of 53.5 mL of a 0.0520 M solution of NaOH results in a change to green at t he endpoint,
due to a mixture of the blue and yellow forms of the indicator. What is the actual mass of vitamin C in the tablet? (The molar
mass of ascorbic acid is 176.13 g/mol.)Example: Vitamin C

2.1.7.8 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169969
Figure: Bromothymol Blue is used as an indicator. If placed in a acidic solution it will turn the solution yellow, and if
placed in a basic solution it will turn the solution b lue. The equivalence point is seen when the solution t urns green. pH is
important for a variety of reasons. For example if you are trying to discard an acidic solution, you could add bromothymol blue
to the solution and then titrate in some base until th e solution turned green. This indicates that it is neut ral. Image from The
Science Education Resources Center at Carleton.
Given: reactant, volume of sample solution, and volume and molari ty of titrant
Asked for: mass of unknown
Strategy:
A Write the balanced chemical equation for the react ion and calculate the number of moles of base needed to neutralize the
ascorbic acid.
B Using mole ratios, determine the amount of ascorbic aci d consumed. Calculate the mass of vitamin C by multi plying the
number of moles of ascorbic acid by its molar mass.
Solution:
A Because ascorbic acid acts as a monoprotic acid, we can wri te the balanced chemical equation for the reaction as
where HAsc is ascorbic acid and Asc is ascorbate. The number o f moles of OH ions needed to neutralize the ascorbic acid is
B The mole ratio of the base added to the acid consu med is 1:1, so the number of moles of OH added equals the number of
moles of ascorbic acid present in the tablet:
Because 0.490 g equals 490 mg, the tablet contains about 2% less vitamin C than advertised.
Vinegar is essentially a dilute solution of acetic ac id in water. Vinegar is usually produced in a concentr ated form and then
diluted with water to give a final concentration of 4 %–7% acetic acid; that is, a 4% m/v solution contains 4.00 g of acetic acid
per 100 mL of solution. If a drop of bromothymol blue indicator is added to 50.0 mL of concentrated vine gar stock and 31.0
mL of 2.51 M NaOH are needed to turn the solution from yellow to green, what is the percentage of acetic acid in the vinegar
stock? (Assume that the density of the vinegar solution is 1.00 g/mL.)
Answer
9.35%− −
Exercise: Vinegar

2.1.7.9 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169969Summary
Either the masses or the volumes of solutions of react ants and products can be used to determine the amount s of other species in the
balanced chemical equation. Quantitative calculation s that involve the stoichiometry of reactions in so lution use volumes of
solutions of known concentration instead of masses of reactants or products. The coefficients in the balanc ed chemical equation tell
how many moles of reactants are needed and how many mole s of product can be produced.
Quantitative analysis of an unknown solution can be ac hieved using titration methods. The concentration of a species in solution
can be determined by quantitative analysis. One such method is a titration, in which a measured volume of a solution of one
substance, the titrant, is added to a solution of another substance to deter mine its concentration. The equivalence point in a
titration is the point at which exactly enough react ant has been added for the reaction to go to complet ion. A standard solution, a
solution whose concentration is known precisely, is u sed to determine the concentration of the titrant. M any titrations, especially
those that involve acid–base reactions, rely on an i ndicator. The point at which a color change is observ ed is the endpoint, which is
close to the equivalence point if the indicator is ch osen properly.
Contributors and Attributions
Modified by Joshua Halpern (Howard University)
2.1.7: Solution Stoichiometry and Chemical Analysis is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
LibreTexts.

1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169972SECTION OVERVIEW
Topic C- Gas Laws and Kinetic Molecular Theory
WHAT YOU SHOULD BE ABLE TO DO WHEN YOU HA VE FINISHED THIS TOPIC:
1. Use classical gas laws to relate changes in pressure, volume, temperature, and number of moles to one another.
2. Use Dalton's Law of Partial Pressures to solve problems involving mixtures of gases.
3. Use vapor pressure information and the classical gas laws t o describe the behavior of a gas when it is collected over wate r.
4. Solve stoichiometry problems involving gases, using the i deal gas law.
5. Have sufficient understanding of basic kinetic theory to be able to:
a. Solve problems involving kinetic energy, temperature, m olar mass, and particle velocity for an ideal gas.
b. Use effusion rates to determine the molar mass of a gas.
c. Answer qualitative questions about the Boltzmann distrib ution of kinetic energies and velocities, and their relat ionships
to temperature and molar mass.
6. Describe the factors that differentiate real gas behav ior from the ideal gas model, and use the van der Waals equation to
model real gas behavior.
3.1: Gases
3.1.1: Characteristics of Gases
3.1.2: Pressure
3.1.3: The Gas Laws
3.1.4: The Ideal Gas Equation
3.1.5: Gas V olumes and Chemical Reactions
3.1.6: Gas Mixtures and Partial Pressures
3.1.7: Partial Pressures and Stoichiometry
3.1.8: Kinetic-Molecular Theory
3.1.9: Understanding the Value Distribution of a Variable
3.1.10: Molecular Speed Distribution
3.1.11: Kinetic Energy Distribution
3.1.12: Molecular Effusion and Diffusion
3.1.13: Real Gases - Deviations from Ideal Behavior
Topic C- Gas Laws and Kinetic Molecular Theory is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
LibreTexts.Learning Objectives

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
3.1: Gases
Previously, we focused on the microscopic properties of matter—the properties of individual at oms, ions, and molecules—and how
the electronic structures of atoms and ions determine the stoichiometry and three-dimensional geometry of t he compounds they
form. We will now focus on macroscopic properties—the behavior of aggregates with large num bers of atoms, ions, or molecules.
An understanding of macroscopic properties is centra l to an understanding of chemistry. Why, for example, are many substances
gases under normal pressures and temperatures (1.0 at m, 25°C), whereas others are liquids or solids? We will e xamine each form of
matter—gases, liquids, and solids—as well as the nature of the forces, such as hydrogen bonding and electros tatic interactions, that
hold molecular and ionic compounds together in these thre e states.
In this chapter, we explore the relationships among pressure, temperature, volume, and the amount of gase s. You will learn how to
use these relationships to describe the physical beha vior of a sample of both a pure gaseous substance and mixtures of gases. By the
end of this chapter, your understanding of the gas l aws and the model used to explain the behavior of gas es will allow you to
explain how straws and hot-air balloons work, why hand pumps cannot be used in wells beyond a certain depth, why helium-filled
balloons deflate so rapidly, and how a gas can be liquefi ed for use in preserving biological tissue.
3.1.1: Characteristics of Gases
3.1.2: Pressure
3.1.3: The Gas Laws
3.1.4: The Ideal Gas Equation
3.1.5: Gas V olumes and Chemical Reactions
3.1.6: Gas Mixtures and Partial Pressures
3.1.7: Partial Pressures and Stoichiometry
3.1.8: Kinetic-Molecular Theory
3.1.9: Understanding the Value Distribution of a Variable
3.1.10: Molecular Speed Distribution
3.1.11: Kinetic Energy Distribution
3.1.12: Molecular Effusion and Diffusion
3.1.13: Real Gases - Deviations from Ideal Behavior
Thumbnail: Motion of gas molecules. The randomized ther mal vibrations of fundamental particles such as ato ms and molecules—
gives a substance its “kinetic temperature.” Here, the size of helium atoms relative to their spacing is shown to scale under 1950
atmospheres of pressure. (CC BY-SA 3.0; Greg L).
3.1: Gases is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

3.1.1.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1699743.1.1: Characteristics of Gases
To describe the characteristics of a gas.
The three common phases (or states) of matter are gase s, liquids, and solids. Gases have the lowest density of the three, are highly
compressible, and completely fill any container in whi ch they are placed. Gases behave this way because thei r intermolecular
forces are relatively weak, so their molecules are cons tantly moving independently of the other molecules present. Solids, in
contrast, are relatively dense, rigid, and incompress ible because their intermolecular forces are so str ong that the molecules are
essentially locked in place. Liquids are relatively dense and incompressible, like solids, but they flow r eadily to adapt to the shape
of their containers, like gases. We can therefore conc lude that the sum of the intermolecular forces in li quids are between those of
gases and solids. Figure compares the three states of ma tter and illustrates the differences at the molecular leve l.
Figure: A Diatomic Substance (O) in the Solid, Liquid, and Gaseous States: (a) Solid O has a fixed volume an d shape, and
the molecules are packed tightly together. (b) Liqui d O conforms to the shape of its container but has a fi xed volume; it contains
relatively densely packed molecules. (c) Gaseous O fill s its container completely—regardless of the container’ s size or shape—
and consists of widely separated molecules.
The state of a given substance depends strongly on c onditions. For example, H O is commonly found in all t hree states: solid ice,
liquid water, and water vapor (its gaseous form). Under most conditions, we encounter water as the liquid th at is essential for life;
we drink it, cook with it, and bathe in it. When the temp erature is cold enough to transform the liquid to i ce, we can ski or skate on
it, pack it into a snowball or snow cone, and even bui ld dwellings with it. Water vapor (the term vapor refers to the gaseous form of
a substance that is a liquid or a solid under normal condi tions so nitrogen (N) and oxygen (O) are referred to as gases, but gaseous
water in the atmosphere is called water vapor) is a co mponent of the air we breathe, and it is produced when ever we heat water for
cooking food or making coffee or tea. Water vapor a t temperatures greater than 100°C is called steam. Ste am is used to drive large
machinery, including turbines that generate electricity. The properties of the three states of water are summariz ed in Table 10.1.
Table: Properties of Water at 1.0 atm
Temperature State Density (g/cm3)
≤0°C solid (ice) 0.9167 (at 0.0°C)
0°C–100°C liquid (water) 0.9997 (at 4.0°C)
≥100°C vapor (steam) 0.005476 (at 127°C)
The geometric structure and the physical and chemic al properties of atoms, ions, and molecules usually do not depend on their
physical state; the individual water molecules in ic e, liquid water, and steam, for example, are all identi cal. In contrast, the
macroscopic properties of a substance depend strongl y on its physical state, which is determined by inter molecular forces and
conditions such as temperature and pressure.
Figure shows the locations in the periodic table of t hose elements that are commonly found in the gaseou s, liquid, and solid
states. Except for hydrogen, the elements that occur naturally as gases are on the right side of the per iodic table. Of these, all the
noble gases (group 18) are monatomic gases, whereas t he other gaseous elements are diatomic molecules (H, N, O, F, and
Cl). Oxygen can also form a second allotrope, the high ly reactive triatomic molecule ozone (O), which is also a gas. In contrast,
bromine (as Br) and mercury (Hg) are liquids under nor mal conditions (25°C and 1.0 atm, commonly referred to as “room
temperature and pressure”). Gallium (Ga), which melts at only 29.76°C, can be converted to a liquid simply by holding a containerLearning Objectives
2 2
2 2
2 2 2 2
2 3

3.1.1.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169974of it in your hand or keeping it in a non-air-condi tioned room on a hot summer day. The rest of the elem ents are all solids under
normal conditions.
Figure: Elements That Occur Naturally as Gases, Liquids, and Solids at 25°C and 1 atm. The noble gases and merc ury occur
as monatomic species, whereas all other gases and bromine are diatomic molecules.
All of the gaseous elements (other than the monatomic noble gases) are molecules. Within the same group (1, 15, 16 and 17), the
lightest elements are gases. All gaseous substances are characterized by weak interactions between the const ituent molecules or
atoms.
Summary
Bulk matter can exist in three states: gas, liquid, and solid. Gases have the lowest density of the three, are highly compressible, and
fill their containers completely. Elements that exi st as gases at room temperature and pressure are clust ered on the right side of the
periodic table; they occur as either monatomic gases (t he noble gases) or diatomic molecules (some halogens, N, O).
3.1.1: Characteristics of Gases is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.2 2

3.1.2.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1699753.1.2: Pressure
to describe and measure the pressure of a gas.
At the macroscopic level, a complete physical description of a sample of a gas requires four quantities:
temperature (expressed in kelvins),
volume (expressed in liters),
amount (expressed in moles), and
pressure (in atmospheres).
As we demonstrated below, these variables are not independent (i.e., they cannot be arbitrarily be va ried). If we know the values of
any three of these quantities, we can calculate the fourth and t hereby obtain a full physical description of the gas. Temperature,
volume, and amount have been discussed in previous chap ters. We now discuss pressure and its units of measurement.
Units of Pressure
Any object, whether it is your computer, a person, or a sample of gas, exerts a force on any surface with which it comes in contact.
The air in a balloon, for example, exerts a force a gainst the interior surface of the balloon, and a li quid injected into a mold exerts a
force against the interior surface of the mold, just as a chair exerts a force against the floor becaus e of its mass and the effects of
gravity. If the air in a balloon is heated, the increa sed kinetic energy of the gas eventually causes the b alloon to burst because of the
increased pressure () of the gas, the force () per unit a rea () of surface:
Pressure is dependent on both the force exerted and the size of the area to which the force is applied. W e know from Equation
that applying the same force to a smaller area prod uces a higher pressure. When we use a hose to wash a ca r, for example,
we can increase the pressure of the water by reducing the siz e of the opening of the hose with a thumb.
The units of pressure are derived from the units used to measure force and area. The SI unit for pressure, d erived from the SI units
for force (newtons) and area (square meters), is the n ewton per square meter (), which is called the Pascal (Pa), after the
French mathematician Blaise Pascal (1623–1662):
Assuming a paperback book has a mass of 2.00 kg, a len gth of 27.0 cm, a width of 21.0 cm, and a thickness o f 4.5 cm, what
pressure does it exert on a surface if it is
a. lying flat?
b. standing on edge in a bookcase?
Given: mass and dimensions of object
Asked for: pressure
Strategy:
A. Calculate the force exerted by the book and then comp ute the area that is in contact with a surface.
B. Substitute these two values into Equation to find the pressure exerted on the surface in each orientation.
Solution:
The force exerted by the book does not depend on its orientation. Recall that the force exe rted by an object is F = ma, where m
is its mass and a is its acceleration. In Earth’s gravitational field, t he acceleration is due to gravity (9.8067 m/s at Ear th’s
surface). In SI units, the force exerted by the book is the reforeLearning Objectives
Example

3.1.2.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169975A We calculated the force as 19.6 N. When the book is lying flat, the area is
B The pressure exerted by the text lying flat is thus
A If the book is standing on its end, the force remains the same, but the area decreases:
B The pressure exerted by the text lying flat is thus
What pressure does a 60.0 kg student exert on the floor
a. when standing flat-footed in the laboratory in a pair of te nnis shoes (the surface area of the soles is approximately 18 0
cm)?
b. as she steps heel-first onto a dance floor wearing high-h eeled shoes (the area of the heel = 1.0 cm)?
Answer a
3.27 × 10 Pa
Answer b
5.9 × 10 Pa
Barometric Pressure
Just as we exert pressure on a surface because of gra vity, so does our atmosphere. We live at the bottom of an ocean of gases that
becomes progressively less dense with increasing alti tude. Approximately 99% of the mass of the atmosphere l ies within 30 km of
Earth’s surface (Figure). Every point on Earth’s su rface experiences a net pressure called barometric pressure. The pressure
exerted by the atmosphere is considerable: a 1 m col umn, measured from sea level to the top of the atmos phere, has a mass of
about 10,000 kg, which gives a pressure of about 101 kPa:Exercise

3.1.2.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169975
Figure: Barometric Pressure. Each square meter of Eart h’s surface supports a column of air that is more than 2 00 km high
and weighs about 10,000 kg at Earth’s surface.
Barometric pressure can be measured using a baromete r, a device invented in 1643 by one of Galileo’s stu dents, Evangelista
Torricelli (1608–1647). A barometer may be construct ed from a long glass tube that is closed at one end. It is filled with mercury
and placed upside down in a dish of mercury without al lowing any air to enter the tube. Some of the mercury will run out of the
tube, but a relatively tall column remains inside (Figure). Why doesn’t all the mercury run out? Gravity is certainly exerting
a downward force on the mercury in the tube, but it is opposed by the pressure of the atmosphere pushing d own on the surface of
the mercury in the dish, which has the net effect of p ushing the mercury up into the tube. Because there is no air above the mercury
inside the tube in a properly filled barometer (it contains a vacuum), there is no pressure pushing down o n the column. Thus the
mercury runs out of the tube until the pressure exer ted by the mercury column itself exactly balances th e pressure of the
atmosphere. The pressure exerted by the mercury column ca n be expressed as:
with
is the gravitational acceleration,
is the mass,
is the density,
is the volume,

3.1.2.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169975 is the bottom area, and
is height of the mercury column.
Under normal weather conditions at sea level, the two f orces are balanced when the top of the mercury column is approximately
760 mm above the level of the mercury in the dish, as shown in Figure. This value varies with meteorologic al conditions and
altitude. In Denver, Colorado, for example, at an elev ation of about 1 mile, or 1609 m (5280 ft), the heig ht of the mercury column
is 630 mm rather than 760 mm.
Figure: A Mercury Barometer. The pressure exerted by the atmosphere on the surface of the pool of mercury supports a
column of mercury in the tube that is about 760 mm t all. Because the boiling point of mercury is quite hi gh (356.73°C), there is
very little mercury vapor in the space above the mer cury column.
Mercury barometers have been used to measure barometr ic pressure for so long that they have their own uni t for pressure: the
millimeter of mercury (mmHg), often called the torr, after Torricelli. Standard barometric pressure is the barometric pressure
required to support a column of mercury exactly 760 mm tall; this pressure is also referred to as 1 atmo sphere (atm). These units
are also related to the pascal:
Thus a pressure of 1 atm equals 760 mmHg exactly.
We are so accustomed to living under this pressure th at we never notice it. Instead, what we notice are changes in the pressure,
such as when our ears pop in fast elevators in skyscr apers or in airplanes during rapid changes in altitu de. We make use of
barometric pressure in many ways. We can use a drinki ng straw because sucking on it removes air and thereby reduces the pressure
inside the straw. The barometric pressure pushing down on the liquid in the glass then forces the liquid up the stra w.
One of the authors visited Rocky Mountain National Park several years ago. After departing from an airport at sea level in the
eastern United States, he arrived in Denver (altitude 52 80 ft), rented a car, and drove to the top of the hi ghway outside Estes
Park (elevation 14,000 ft). He noticed that even sligh t exertion was very difficult at this altitude, where the barometric pressure
is only 454 mmHg. Convert this pressure to
a. atmospheres (atm).
b. bar.
Given: pressure in millimeters of mercury
Asked for: pressure in atmospheres and bar
Strategy:
Use the conversion factors in Equation to convert from mil limeters of mercury to atmospheres and kilopascals.Example: Barometric Pressure

3.1.2.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169975Solution:
From Equation, we have 1 atm = 760 mmHg = 101.325 kPa. The pres sure at 14,000 ft in atm is thus
The pressure in bar is given by
Mt. Everest, at 29,028 ft above sea level, is the world’ s tallest mountain. The normal barometric pressure at this altitude is
about 0.308 atm. Convert this pressure to
a. millimeters of mercury.
b. bar.
Answer a
234 mmHg;
Answer b
0.312 bar
Manometers
Barometers measure barometric pressure, but manomete rs measure the pressures of samples of gases contain ed in an apparatus.
The key feature of a manometer is a U-shaped tube co ntaining mercury (or occasionally another nonvolati le liquid). A closed-end
manometer is shown schematically in part (a) in Figure. When the bulb contains no gas (i.e., when its interi or is a near
vacuum), the heights of the two columns of mercury are the same because the space above the mercury on the l eft is a near vacuum
(it contains only traces of mercury vapor). If a gas is released into the bulb on the right, it will exer t a pressure on the mercury in
the right column, and the two columns of mercury will no longer be the same height. The difference between the heights of the two
columns is equal to the pressure of the gas.
Figure: The Two Types of Manometer. (a) In a closed-en d manometer, the space above the mercury column on t he left (the
reference arm) is essentially a vacuum (P ≈ 0), and the difference in the heights of the two columns gives the pressure of the gas
contained in the bulb directly. (b) In an open-end manometer, the left (reference) arm is open to the a tmosphere (P ≈ 1 atm), and the
difference in the heights of the two columns gives the difference between barometric pressure and the pressure of the ga s in the
bulb.
If the tube is open to the atmosphere instead of close d, as in the open-end manometer shown in part (b) in Fi gure, then the
two columns of mercury have the same height only if t he gas in the bulb has a pressure equal to the baromet ric pressure. If the gas
in the bulb has a higher pressure, the mercury in the open tube will be force d up by the gas pushing down on the mercury in the
other arm of the U-shaped tube. The pressure of the g as in the bulb is therefore the sum of the barometric pressure (measured with
a barometer) and the difference in the heights of t he two columns. If the gas in the bulb has a pressure less than that of theExercise: Barometric Pressure

3.1.2.6 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169975atmosphere, then the height of the mercury will be gr eater in the arm attached to the bulb. In this case, t he pressure of the gas in the
bulb is the barometric pressure minus the difference in th e heights of the two columns.
Suppose you want to construct a closed-end manometer to measure gas pressures in the range 0.000–0.200 atm. Because of the
toxicity of mercury, you decide to use water rather than mercury. How tall a column of water do you need? (The density of
water is 1.00 g/cm; the density of mercury is 13.53 g/cm.)
Given: pressure range and densities of water and mercury
Asked for: column height
Strategy:
A. Calculate the height of a column of mercury correspond ing to 0.200 atm in millimeters of mercury. This is the hei ght
needed for a mercury-filled column.
B. From the given densities, use a proportion to compute t he height needed for a water-filled column.
Solution:
A In millimeters of mercury, a gas pressure of 0.200 atm is
Using a mercury manometer, you would need a mercury column a t least 152 mm high.
B Because water is less dense than mercury, you need a taller column of water to achieve the same pressure as a giv en column
of mercury. The height needed for a water-filled col umn corresponding to a pressure of 0.200 atm is prop ortional to the ratio of
the density of mercury to the density of water
The answer makes sense: it takes a taller column of a less d ense liquid to achieve the same pressure.
Suppose you want to design a barometer to measure barom etric pressure in an environment that is always hotter than 30°C. To
avoid using mercury, you decide to use gallium, which melts at 29.76°C; the density of liquid gallium at 25°C is 6.114 g/cm.
How tall a column of gallium do you need if P = 1.00 atm?
Answer
1.68 m

Summary
Pressure is defined as the force exerted per unit area; it can be measured using a barometer or manometer. Fo ur quantities must be
known for a complete physical description of a sampl e of a gas: temperature, volume, amount, and pressure. Pressure is force per
unit area of surface; the SI unit for pressure is the pascal (Pa), defined as 1 newton per square meter (N/m). The pressu re exerted
by an object is proportional to the force it exerts and inversely proportional to the area on which the f orce is exerted. The pressure
exerted by Earth’s atmosphere, called barometric pressure, is about 101 kPa or 14.7 lb/in. at sea level. barometr ic pressure can be
measured with a barometer, a closed, inverted tube filled with mercury. The he ight of the mercury column is proportional to
barometric pressure, which is often reported in units of millimeters of mercury (mmHg), also called torr. Standard barometricExample
3 3
Exercise

3.1.2.7 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169975pressure, the pressure required to support a column of mercu ry 760 mm tall, is yet another unit of pressure: 1 atmosphere (atm).
A manometer is an apparatus used to measure the pressure of a sample o f a gas.
3.1.2: Pressure is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

3.1.3.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1699763.1.3: The Gas Laws
To understand the relationships among pressure, temper ature, volume, and the amount of a gas.
Early scientists explored the relationships among th e pressure of a gas (P) and its temperature (T), volume (V), and amount (n) by
holding two of the four variables constant (amount an d temperature, for example), varying a third (such a s pressure), and
measuring the effect of the change on the fourth (i n this case, volume). The history of their discoverie s provides several excellent
examples of the scientific method.
The Relationship between Pressure and Volume: Boyle's Law
As the pressure on a gas increases, the volume of the g as decreases because the gas particles are forced close r together. Conversely,
as the pressure on a gas decreases, the gas volume in creases because the gas particles can now move farthe r apart. Weather balloons
get larger as they rise through the atmosphere to r egions of lower pressure because the volume of the gas has increased; that is, the
atmospheric gas exerts less pressure on the surface of the balloon, so the interior gas expands until t he internal and external
pressures are equal.
Figure: Boyle’s Experiment Using a J-Shaped Tube to Dete rmine the Relationship between Gas Pressure and V olume. (a)
Initially the gas is at a pressure of 1 atm = 760 mmHg (the mercury is at the same height in both the arm co ntaining the sample and
the arm open to the atmosphere); its volume is V. (b) If enough mercury is added to the right side to give a difference in height of
760 mmHg between the two arms, the pressure of the gas is 760 mmHg (atmospheric pressure) + 760 mmHg = 1520 mm Hg and
the volume is V/2. (c) If an additional 760 mmHg is added to the co lumn on the right, the total pressure on the gas incre ases to 2280
mmHg, and the volume of the gas decreases to V/3 (CC BY-SA-NC; anonymous by request).
The Irish chemist Robert Boyle (1627–1691) carried o ut some of the earliest experiments that determined the quantitative
relationship between the pressure and the volume of a gas. Boyle used a J-shaped tube partially filled with mercury, as shown in
Figure. In these experiments, a small amount of a g as or air is trapped above the mercury column, and its volume is
measured at atmospheric pressure and constant tempe rature. More mercury is then poured into the open a rm to increase the
pressure on the gas sample. The pressure on the gas is atmospheric pressure plus the difference in the heights of the mercury
columns, and the resulting volume is measured. This pr ocess is repeated until either there is no more room in the open arm or the
volume of the gas is too small to be measured accurat ely. Data such as those from one of Boyle’s own experime nts may be plotted
in several ways (Figure). A simple plot of versus gi ves a curve called a hyperbola and reveals an invers e relationshipLearning Objectives

3.1.3.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169976between pressure and volume: as the pressure is doubled, the volume decreases by a factor of two. This relationsh ip between the
two quantities is described as follows:
Dividing both sides by gives an equation illustratin g the inverse relationship between and:
or
where the ∝ symbol is read “is proportional to.” A plot of V versus 1/ P is thus a straight line whose slope is equal to the constant in
Equations and. Dividing both sides of Equation by V instead of P gives a similar relationship between P and
1/V. The numerical value of the constant depends on the amount of gas used in the experiment and on the te mperature at which the
experiments are carried out. This relationship between pressure and volume is known as Boyle’s law, after it s discoverer, and can
be stated as follows: At constant temperature, the volume of a fixed amount o f a gas is inversely proportional to its pressure. This
law in practice is shown in Figure.
Figure: Plots of Boyle’s Data. (a) Here are actual da ta from a typical experiment conducted by Boyle. Bo yle used non-SI
units to measure the volume (in. rather than cm) and the pressure (in. Hg rather than mmHg). (b) This plot of pressure versus
volume is a hyperbola. Because PV is a constant, decreasing the pressure by a factor of t wo results in a twofold increase in volume
and vice versa. (c) A plot of volume versus 1/pressure f or the same data shows the inverse linear relationship b etween the two
quantities, as expressed by the equation V = constant/ P (CC BY-SA-NC; anonymous by request).
At constant temperature, the volume of a fixed amount of a gas is inversel y proportional
to its pressure
The Relationship between Temperature and Volume: Charles's Law
Hot air rises, which is why hot-air balloons ascend throu gh the atmosphere and why warm air collects near the ceiling and cooler
air collects at ground level. Because of this behav ior, heating registers are placed on or near the floo r, and vents for air-conditioning
are placed on or near the ceiling. The fundamental r eason for this behavior is that gases expand when the y are heated. Because the
same amount of substance now occupies a greater volum e, hot air is less dense than cold air. The substance wi th the lower density
—in this case hot air—rises through the substance with the higher density, the cooler air.
The first experiments to quantify the relationship b etween the temperature and the volume of a gas were ca rried out in 1783 by an
avid balloonist, the French chemist Jacques Alexandre César Charles (1746–1823). Charles’s initial experime nts showed that a plot
of the volume of a given sample of gas versus temper ature (in degrees Celsius) at constant pressure is a st raight line. Similar but
more precise studies were carried out by another ballo on enthusiast, the Frenchman Joseph-Louis Gay-Lussac (177 8–1850), who
showed that a plot of V versus T was a straight line tha t could be extrapolated to a point at zero volume, a theoretical condition now
known to correspond to −273.15°C (Figure).A sample of g as cannot really have a volume of zero because any sa mple of
matter must have some volume. Furthermore, at 1 atm pre ssure all gases liquefy at temperatures well above −273.15°C. Note from3 3

3.1.3.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169976part (a) in Figure that the slope of the plot of V versus T varies for the same gas at different pressu res but that the intercept
remains constant at −273.15°C. Similarly, as shown in part (b) in Figure, plots of V versus T for differen t amounts of varied
gases are straight lines with different slopes but the same intercept on the T axis.
Figure: The Relationship between V olume and Temperat ure. (a) In these plots of volume versus temperature fo r equal-sized
samples of H at three different pressures, the solid line s show the experimentally measured data down to −100°C, and the broken
lines show the extrapolation of the data to V = 0. The temperature scale is given in both degrees C elsius and kelvins. Although the
slopes of the lines decrease with increasing pressure, all of the lines extrapolate to the same temperature at V = 0 (−273.15°C = 0
K). (b) In these plots of volume versus temperature for different amounts of selected gases at 1 atm pressure, a ll the plots
extrapolate to a value of V = 0 at −273.15°C, regardless of the identity or the amount of the gas (CC BY-SA-NC; anonymous by
request).
The significance of the invariant T intercept in pl ots of V versus T was recognized in 1848 by the Briti sh physicist William
Thomson (1824–1907), later named Lord Kelvin. He postul ated that −273.15°C was the lowest possible temperature that could
theoretically be achieved, for which he coined the term a bsolute zero (0 K).
We can state Charles’s and Gay-Lussac’s findings in sim ple terms: At constant pressure, the volume of a fix ed amount of gas is
directly proportional to its absolute temperature (i n kelvins). This relationship, illustrated in part (b) in Figure is often
referred to as Charles’s law and is stated mathematically as
or
with temperature expressed in kelvins, not in degrees Celsius. Charles’s law is valid for virtually all gases at te mperatures well
above their boiling points.
The Relationship between Amount and Volume: Avogadro's Law
We can demonstrate the relationship between the volu me and the amount of a gas by filling a balloon; as we add more gas, the
balloon gets larger. The specific quantitative rela tionship was discovered by the Italian chemist Amedeo A vogadro, who recognized
the importance of Gay-Lussac’s work on combining volume s of gases. In 1811, Avogadro postulated that, at the sa me temperature
and pressure, equal volumes of gases contain the sa me number of gaseous particles (Figure). This is the h istoric “Avogadro’s
hypothesis.”2

3.1.3.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169976
Figure: Avogadro’s Hypothesis. Equal volumes of four dif ferent gases at the same temperature and pressure contai n the same
number of gaseous particles. Because the molar mass of ea ch gas is different, the mass of each gas sample is different even though
all contain 1 mol of gas (CC BY-SA-NC; anonymous by r equest).
A logical corollary to Avogadro's hypothesis (someti mes called Avogadro’s law) describes the relationshi p between the volume and
the amount of a gas: At constant temperature and pressure, the volume of a sa mple of gas is directly proportional to the number of
moles of gas in the sample. Stated mathematically,
or
This relationship is valid for most gases at relatively low pressures, but deviations from strict linearity a re observed at elevated
pressures.
For a sample of gas,
V increases as P decreases (and vice versa)
V increases as T increases (and vice versa)
V increases as n increases (and vice versa)
The relationships among the volume of a gas and its pr essure, temperature, and amount are summarized in Fig ure. V olume
increases with increasing temperature or amount, but decreases with increasing pressure.

3.1.3.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169976
Figure: The Empirically Determined Relationships among Pressure, V olume, Temperature, and Amount of a Gas. Th e
thermometer and pressure gauge indicate the temperatu re and the pressure qualitatively, the level in the f lask indicates the volume,
and the number of particles in each flask indicates re lative amounts (CC BY-SA-NC; anonymous by request).
Summary
The volume of a gas is inversely proportional to its pressure and directly proportional to its temperat ure and the amount of gas.
Boyle showed that the volume of a sample of a gas is inversely proportional to its pressure (Boyle’s law), Charles and Gay-Lussac
demonstrated that the volume of a gas is directly pr oportional to its temperature (in kelvins) at consta nt pressure (Charles’s law),
and Avogadro postulated that the volume of a gas is directly proportional to the number of moles of gas present (Avogadro’s law).
Plots of the volume of gases versus temperature extra polate to zero volume at −273.15°C, which is absolute zero (0 K), the lowest
temperature possible. Charles’s law implies that the volu me of a gas is directly proportional to its absolute tempe rature.
3.1.3: The Gas Laws is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

3.1.4.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1699773.1.4: The Ideal Gas Equation
To use the ideal gas law to describe the behavior of a gas.
In this module, the relationship between Pressure, Temper ature, V olume, and Amount of a gas are described and h ow these
relationships can be combined to give a general expression t hat describes the behavior of a gas.
Deriving the Ideal Gas Law
Any set of relationships between a single quantity (s uch as V) and several other variables (,, and) can be combined into a
single expression that describes all the relationships sim ultaneously. The three individual expressions were deriv ed previously:
Boyle’s law
Charles’s law
Avogadro’s law
Combining these three expressions gives
which shows that the volume of a gas is proportional to the number of moles and the temperature and inverse ly proportional to the
pressure. This expression can also be written as
By convention, the proportionality constant in Equat ion is called the gas constant, which is represented by the letter.
Inserting R into Equation gives
Clearing the fractions by multiplying both sides of Equat ion by gives
This equation is known as the ideal gas law.
An ideal gas is defined as a hypothetical gaseous sub stance whose behavior is independent of attractive and repulsive forces and
can be completely described by the ideal gas law. In r eality, there is no such thing as an ideal gas, but an ideal gas is a useful
conceptual model that allows us to understand how gas es respond to changing conditions. As we shall see, un der many conditions,
most real gases exhibit behavior that closely approxi mates that of an ideal gas. The ideal gas law can there fore be used to predict
the behavior of real gases under most conditions. The ideal gas law does not work well at very low temperatur es or very high
pressures, where deviations from ideal behavior are most commonly observed.
Significant deviations from ideal gas behavior commonly occur at low temperature s and
very high pressures.
Before we can use the ideal gas law, however, we need to know the value of the gas constant R. Its form depe nds on the units used
for the other quantities in the expression. If V is e xpressed in liters (L), P in atmospheres (atm), T in ke lvins (K), and n in molesLearning Objectives

3.1.4.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169977(mol), then
Because the product PV has the units of energy, R can also have units of J/(K•mol):
Standard Conditions of Temperature and Pressure
Scientists have chosen a particular set of condition s to use as a reference: 0°C (273.15 K) and pressure,
referred to as standard temperature and pressure (STP).
Please note that STP was defined differently in the part. The old definition was based on a standard pressure of 1 a tm.
We can calculate the volume of 1.000 mol of an ideal gas under standard conditions using the variant of the ideal gas law given in
Equation:
Thus the volume of 1 mol of an ideal gas is 22.71 L at STP and 22.41 L at 0°C and 1 atm, approximately equivalent to the
volume of three basketballs. The molar volumes of seve ral real gases at 0°C and 1 atm are given in Table 10.3, which shows that
the deviations from ideal gas behavior are quite sma ll. Thus the ideal gas law does a good job of approxim ating the behavior of real
gases at 0°C and 1 atm. The relationships described i n Section 10.3 as Boyle’s, Charles’s, and Avogadro’s l aws are simply special
cases of the ideal gas law in which two of the four parameters (P, V, T, and n) are held fixed.
Table: Molar V olumes of Selected Gases at 0°C and 1 atm
Gas Molar Volume (L)
He 22.434
Ar 22.397
H 22.433
N 22.402
O 22.397
CO 22.260
NH 22.079
Applying the Ideal Gas Law
The ideal gas law allows us to calculate the value of t he fourth variable for a gaseous sample if we know the values of any three of
the four variables (P, V, T, and n). It also allows us to predict the final state of a sample of a gas (i.e., its final temperature,
pressure, volume, and amount) following any changes i n conditions if the parameters (P, V, T, and n) are specified for an initial
state. Some applications are illustrated in the following e xamples. The approach used throughout is always to star t with the same
equation—the ideal gas law—and then determine which q uantities are given and which need to be calculated. Let’s begin with
simple cases in which we are given three of the four param eters needed for a complete physical description of a gas eous sample.
The balloon that Charles used for his initial flight in 1783 was destroyed, but we can estimate that its vo lume was 31,150 L
(1100 ft), given the dimensions recorded at the tim e. If the temperature at ground level was 86°F (30°C) a nd the atmospheric
pressure was 745 mmHg, how many moles of hydrogen gas were nee ded to fill the balloon?2
Example

3.1.4.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169977Given: volume, temperature, and pressure
Asked for: amount of gas
Strategy:
A. Solve the ideal gas law for the unknown quantity, in this case n.
B. Make sure that all quantities are given in units that are compatible with the units of the gas constant. If necessary, convert
them to the appropriate units, insert them into the equati on you have derived, and then calculate the number of mol es of
hydrogen gas needed.
Solution:
A We are given values for P, T, and V and asked to calculate n. If we solve the ideal gas law (Equation) for n, we obtain
B P and T are given in units that are not compatible with the units of the gas constant [R = 0.08206 (L•atm)/(K•mol)]. We must
therefore convert the temperature to kelvins and the pressu re to atmospheres:
Substituting these values into the expression we derived for n, we obtain
Suppose that an “empty” aerosol spray-paint can has a v olume of 0.406 L and contains 0.025 mol of a propella nt gas such as
CO. What is the pressure of the gas at 25°C?
Answer
1.5 atm
In Example, we were given three of the four paramete rs needed to describe a gas under a particular set of conditions, and we
were asked to calculate the fourth. We can also use th e ideal gas law to calculate the effect of changes in any of the specified
conditions on any of the other parameters, as shown in Exam ple.
General Gas Equation
When a gas is described under two different conditio ns, the ideal gas equation must be applied twice - to an initial condition and a
final condition. This is:
Both equations can be rearranged to give:
The two equations are equal to each other since each is equa l to the same constant. Therefore, we have:
The equation is called the general gas equation. The equation is particularly useful when one or two of the gas properties are held
constant between the two conditions. In such cases, the equat ion can be simplified by eliminating these constant gas pro perties.Exercise

3.1.4.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169977Suppose that Charles had changed his plans and carried out his initial flight not in August but on a cold d ay in January, when
the temperature at ground level was −10°C (14°F). How la rge a balloon would he have needed to contain the sa me amount of
hydrogen gas at the same pressure as in Example?
Given: temperature, pressure, amount, and volume in August; tempe rature in January
Asked for: volume in January
Strategy:
A. Use the results from Example for August as the initial con ditions and then calculate the change in volume due to the
change in temperature from 30°C to −10°C. Begin by con structing a table showing the initial and final conditions.
B. Simplify the general gas equation by eliminating the q uantities that are held constant between the initial and final
conditions, in this case and.
C. Solve for the unknown parameter.
Solution:
A To see exactly which parameters have changed and which are constant, prepare a table of the initial and final c onditions:
Initial (August) Final (January)
B Both and are the same in both cases (). Therefore, Equati on can be simplified to:
This is the relationship first noted by Charles.
C Solving the equation for, we get:
It is important to check your answer to be sure that it makes sense, just in case you have accidentally inverted a quantity or
multiplied rather than divided. In this case, the tem perature of the gas decreases. Because we know that gas vol ume decreases
with decreasing temperature, the final volume must be less than the initial volume, so the answer makes sens e. We could have
calculated the new volume by plugging all the given numbers into the ideal gas law, but it is generally m uch easier and faster to
focus on only the quantities that change.
At a laboratory party, a helium-filled balloon with a volume of 2.00 L at 22°C is dropped into a large con tainer of liquid
nitrogen (T = −196°C). What is the final volume of the gas in the balloon?
Answer
0.52 L
Example illustrates the relationship originally ob served by Charles. We could work through similar exam ples illustrating the
inverse relationship between pressure and volume noted by Boyle (PV = constant) and the relationship between volume andExample
Exercise

3.1.4.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169977amount observed by Avogadro (V/n = constant). We will not do so, however, because it i s more important to note that the
historically important gas laws are only special cases of the ideal gas law in which two quantities are varied while the other two
remain fixed. The method used in Example can be ap plied in any such case, as we demonstrate in Example (which
also shows why heating a closed container of a gas, such as a butane lighter cartridge or an aerosol can, may cause a n explosion).
Aerosol cans are prominently labeled with a warning su ch as “Do not incinerate this container when empty.” Assu me that you
did not notice this warning and tossed the “empty” a erosol can in Exercise 5 (0.025 mol in 0.406 L, initi ally at 25°C and 1.5
atm internal pressure) into a fire at 750°C. What would be the pressure inside the can (if it did not explode)?
Given: initial volume, amount, temperature, and pressure; final temperature
Asked for: final pressure
Strategy:
Follow the strategy outlined in Example.
Solution:
Prepare a table to determine which parameters change and which are held constant:
Initial Final
Both and are the same in both cases (). Therefore, Equati on can be simplified to:
By solving the equation for, we get:
This pressure is more than enough to rupture a thin she et metal container and cause an explosion!
Suppose that a fire extinguisher, filled with CO to a p ressure of 20.0 atm at 21°C at the factory, is accid entally left in the sun
in a closed automobile in Tucson, Arizona, in July. Th e interior temperature of the car rises to 160°F (71.1°C). What is the
internal pressure in the fire extinguisher?
Answer
23.4 atm
In Examples and, two of the four parameters (P, V, T, and n) were fixed while one was allowed to vary, and we were
interested in the effect on the value of the fourth. In fact, we often encounter cases where two of the va riables P, V, and T areExample
Exercise

3.1.4.6 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169977allowed to vary for a given sample of gas (hence n is constant), and we are interested in the change in the value of the third under
the new conditions.
We saw in Example that Charles used a balloon with a v olume of 31,150 L for his initial ascent and that th e balloon
contained 1.23 × 10 mol of H gas initially at 30°C and 745 mmHg. Suppose that Gay-Lussac had also used this ba lloon for
his record-breaking ascent to 23,000 ft and that th e pressure and temperature at that altitude were 312 mmHg and −30°C,
respectively. To what volume would the balloon have ha d to expand to hold the same amount of hydrogen gas a t the higher
altitude?
Given: initial pressure, temperature, amount, and volume; final p ressure and temperature
Asked for: final volume
Strategy:
Follow the strategy outlined in Example.
Solution:
Begin by setting up a table of the two sets of conditions:
Initial Final
By eliminating the constant property () of the gas, Equati on is simplified to:
By solving the equation for, we get:
Does this answer make sense? Two opposing factors are a t work in this problem: decreasing the pressure tends to increase the
volume of the gas, while decreasing the temperature te nds to decrease the volume of the gas. Which do we expect to
predominate? The pressure drops by more than a facto r of two, while the absolute temperature drops by onl y about 20%.
Because the volume of a gas sample is directly prop ortional to both T and 1/ P, the variable that changes the most will have the
greatest effect on V. In this case, the effect of decreasing pressure pre dominates, and we expect the volume of the gas to
increase, as we found in our calculation.
We could also have solved this problem by solving th e ideal gas law for V and then substituting the relevant parameters for a n
altitude of 23,000 ft:
Except for a difference caused by rounding to the l ast significant figure, this is the same result we obta ined previously. There is
often more than one “right” way to solve chemical problems.
A steel cylinder of compressed argon with a volume o f 0.400 L was filled to a pressure of 145 atm at 10° C. At 1.00 atm
pressure and 25°C, how many 15.0 mL incandescent light bulbs could be filled from this cylinder? (Hint: fin d the number of
moles of argon in each container.)Example
Exercise

3.1.4.7 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169977Answer
4.07 × 10
Using the Ideal Gas Law to Calculate Gas Densities and Molar Masses
The ideal gas law can also be used to calculate mola r masses of gases from experimentally measured gas den sities. To see how this
is possible, we first rearrange the ideal gas law to obtain
The left side has the units of moles per unit volum e (mol/L). The number of moles of a substance equals its mass (, in grams)
divided by its molar mass (, in grams per mole):
Substituting this expression for into Equation gives
Because is the density of a substance, we can replace by and rearrange to give
The distance between particles in gases is large com pared to the size of the particles, so their densit ies are much lower than the
densities of liquids and solids. Consequently, gas den sity is usually measured in grams per liter (g/L) rath er than grams per
milliliter (g/mL).
Calculate the density of butane at 25°C and a pressure of 7 50 mmHg.
Given: compound, temperature, and pressure
Asked for: density
Strategy:
A. Calculate the molar mass of butane and convert all qua ntities to appropriate units for the value of the gas co nstant.
B. Substitute these values into Equation to obtain the density.
Solution:
A The molar mass of butane (C H) is
Using 0.08206 (L•atm)/(K•mol) for R means that we need to convert the temperature from degrees Celsius to kelvins (T = 25 +
273 = 298 K) and the pressure from millimeters of mercury to atmospheres:
B Substituting these values into Equation gives3
Example
4 10

3.1.4.8 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169977Radon (Rn) is a radioactive gas formed by the decay of naturally occurring uranium in rocks such as gra nite. It tends to collect
in the basements of houses and poses a significant health risk if present in indoor air. Many states now require that houses be
tested for radon before they are sold. Calculate the density of radon at 1.00 atm pressure and 20°C and co mpare it with the
density of nitrogen gas, which constitutes 80% of the atmosphere, under the same conditions to see why radon is found in
basements rather than in attics.
Answer
radon, 9.23 g/L; N, 1.17 g/L
A common use of Equation is to determine the molar mass of an unknown gas by measuring its density at a known
temperature and pressure. This method is particularl y useful in identifying a gas that has been produced in a reaction, and it is not
difficult to carry out. A flask or glass bulb of kno wn volume is carefully dried, evacuated, sealed, and wei ghed empty. It is then
filled with a sample of a gas at a known temperature a nd pressure and reweighed. The difference in mass bet ween the two readings
is the mass of the gas. The volume of the flask is us ually determined by weighing the flask when empty and when filled with a
liquid of known density such as water. The use of density me asurements to calculate molar masses is illustrated in Exa mple.
The reaction of a copper penny with nitric acid resul ts in the formation of a red-brown gaseous compound containing nitrogen
and oxygen. A sample of the gas at a pressure of 727 mmHg and a temperature of 18°C weighs 0.289 g in a fl ask with a
volume of 157.0 mL. Calculate the molar mass of the gas and suggest a reasonable chemical formula for the compound.
Given: pressure, temperature, mass, and volume
Asked for: molar mass and chemical formula
Strategy:
A. Solve Equation for the molar mass of the gas and then cal culate the density of the gas from the information given.
B. Convert all known quantities to the appropriate unit s for the gas constant being used. Substitute the known values into your
equation and solve for the molar mass.
C. Propose a reasonable empirical formula using the atom ic masses of nitrogen and oxygen and the calculated mola r mass of
the gas.
Solution:
A Solving Equation for the molar mass gives
Density is the mass of the gas divided by its volume:
B We must convert the other quantities to the appropriate u nits before inserting them into the equation:
The molar mass of the unknown gas is thusExercise
Example

3.1.4.9 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169977C The atomic masses of N and O are approximately 14 an d 16, respectively, so we can construct a list showing th e masses of
possible combinations:
The most likely choice is NO which is in agreement wit h the data. The red-brown color of smog also results fr om the presence
of NO gas.
You are in charge of interpreting the data from an unmanned space probe that has just landed on Venus and sent back a report
on its atmosphere. The data are as follows: pressure, 9 0 atm; temperature, 557°C; density, 58 g/L. The maj or constituent of the
atmosphere (>95%) is carbon. Calculate the molar mass of the major gas present and identify it.
Answer
44 g/mol;
Summary
The ideal gas law is derived from empirical relationsh ips among the pressure, the volume, the temperature, a nd the number of
moles of a gas; it can be used to calculate any of the four properties if the other three are known.
Ideal gas equation:,
where
General gas equation:
Density of a gas:
The empirical relationships among the volume, the te mperature, the pressure, and the amount of a gas ca n be combined into the
ideal gas law, PV = nRT. The proportionality constant, R, is called the gas constant and has the value 0.08206 (L•atm)/(K•mol),
8.3145 J/(K•mol), or 1.9872 cal/(K•mol), depending on t he units used. The ideal gas law describes the behavior of an ideal gas, a
hypothetical substance whose behavior can be explaine d quantitatively by the ideal gas law and the kinetic molecular theory of
gases. Standard temperature and pressure (STP) is 0°C and 1 atm. The volume of 1 mol of an ideal gas at STP is 22.41 L, the
standard molar volume. All of the empirical gas relationships are special cases of the ideal gas law in which two of the four
parameters are held constant. The ideal gas law allows us to calculate the value of the fourth quantity (P, V, T, or n) needed to
describe a gaseous sample when the others are known and also predict the value of these quantities following a change in
conditions if the original conditions (values of P, V, T, and n) are known. The ideal gas law can also be used to calc ulate the density
of a gas if its molar mass is known or, conversely, the molar mass of an unknown gas sample if its density is measured.
3.1.4: The Ideal Gas Equation is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.2
Exercise

3.1.5.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1699783.1.5: Gas Volumes and Chemical Reactions
To relate the amount of gas consumed or released in a che mical reaction to the stoichiometry of the reaction.
To understand how the ideal gas equation and the stoichiom etry of a reaction can be used to calculate the volume o f gas
produced or consumed in a reaction.
With the ideal gas law, we can use the relationship between the amounts of gases (in moles) and their volumes (in liters) to
calculate the stoichiometry of reactions involving g ases, if the pressure and temperature are known. This is important for several
reasons. Many reactions that are carried out in the la boratory involve the formation or reaction of a gas, so chemists must be able to
quantitatively treat gaseous products and reactants as readily as they quantitatively treat solids or so lutions. Furthermore, many, if
not most, industrially important reactions are carried out in the gas phase for practical reasons. Gases mix readily, are easily heated
or cooled, and can be transferred from one place to anoth er in a manufacturing facility via simple pumps and plu mbing.

Gas Volumes in Chemical Reactions
The ideal gas law can be used to calculate volume of gases consumed or produced. The ideal-gas equation f requently is used to
interconvert between volumes and molar amounts in chemi cal equations.
What volume of carbon dioxide gas is produced at STP by the d ecomposition of 0.150 g via the equation:
Solution
Begin by converting the mass of calcium carbonate to mole s.
The stoichiometry of the reaction dictates that the number of moles decomposed equals the number of moles
produced. Use the ideal-gas equation to convert moles of to a volume.
A 3.00 L container is filled with at 770 mmHg at 27 C. A sample of vapor is then added.
What is the partial pressure of and in atm?
What is the total pressure in the container in atm?
Solution
Step 1: Write down all given information, and convert as ne cessary.
Before:
\(P = 770\,mmHg \rigtharrow 1.01 \,atm\]Learning Objectives
Example
Example
o

3.1.5.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169978Other Unknowns: =?
Step 2: After writing down all your given information, f ind the unknown moles of.
Because the pressure of the container before the was added contained only, that is your partial pressure of. After
converting it to atm, you have already answered part of the question!
Step 3: Now that have pressure for, you must find the parti al pressure for. Use the ideal gas equation.
but because both gases share the same V olume () and T emperature () and since the Gas Constant () is const ants, all three
terms cancel.
This is the partial pressure.
Step 4: Now find total pressure.
Sulfuric acid, the industrial chemical produced in gr eatest quantity (almost 45 million tons per year in t he United States alone),
is prepared by the combustion of sulfur in air to giv e, followed by the reaction of with in the presence of a catalyst
to give, which reacts with water to give. The overall che mical equation is as follows:
What volume of O (in liters) at 22°C and 745 mmHg pressure is required to produce 1.00 ton (907.18 kg) of H SO?
Given: reaction, temperature, pressure, and mass of one product
Asked for: volume of gaseous reactant
Strategy:
A Calculate the number of moles of H SO in 1.00 ton. Fro m the stoichiometric coefficients in the balanced c hemical equation,
calculate the number of moles of required.Example: Sulfuric Acid
2 2 4
2 4

3.1.5.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169978B Use the ideal gas law to determine the volume of req uired under the given conditions. Be sure that all quantities are
expressed in the appropriate units.
Solution:
mass of → moles → moles → liters
A We begin by calculating the number of moles of H SO in 1.00 ton:
We next calculate the number of moles of required:
B After converting all quantities to the appropriate uni ts, we can use the ideal gas law to calculate the volume of O:
The answer means that more than 300,000 L of oxygen g as are needed to produce 1 ton of sulfuric acid. The se numbers may
give you some appreciation for the magnitude of the engi neering and plumbing problems faced in industrial chemi stry.
Charles used a balloon containing approximately 31,15 0 L of for his initial flight in 1783. The hydrogen gas was produced
by the reaction of metallic iron with dilute hydrochlori c acid according to the following balanced chemical equat ion:
How much iron (in kilograms) was needed to produce thi s volume of if the temperature were 30°C and the at mospheric
pressure was 745 mmHg?
Answer
68.6 kg of Fe (approximately 150 lb)
Sodium azide () decomposes to form sodium metal and nitrogen gas according to the following balanced che mical
equation:
This reaction is used to inflate the air bags that c ushion passengers during automobile collisions. The reaction is initiated in air
bags by an electrical impulse and results in the ra pid evolution of gas. If the gas that results from th e decomposition of a
5.00 g sample of could be collected by displacing water from an inverted flask, what volume of gas would be produced at
21°C and 762 mmHg?
Given: reaction, mass of compound, temperature, and pressure
Asked for: volume of nitrogen gas produced
Strategy:2 4
Exercise
Example: Emergency Air bags

3.1.5.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169978A Calculate the number of moles of gas produced. From the data in Table S3, determine the partial pressure of gas in the
flask.
B Use the ideal gas law to find the volume of gas produced.
Solution:
A Because we know the mass of the reactant and the stoi chiometry of the reaction, our first step is to cal culate the number of
moles of gas produced:
The pressure given (762 mmHg) is the total pressure in the flask, which is the sum of the pressures due to the N gas and the
water vapor present. Table S3 tells us that the vapor pressure of water is 18.65 mmHg at 21°C (294 K), so the partial pressure
of the gas in the flask is only
B Solving the ideal gas law for V and substituting the other quantities (in the appropr iate units), we get
A 1.00 g sample of zinc metal is added to a solutio n of dilute hydrochloric acid. It dissolves to produ ce gas according to the
equation
The resulting H gas is collected in a water-filled bo ttle at 30°C and an atmospheric pressure of 760 mmHg. What volume does
it occupy?
Answer
0.397 L
Summary
The relationship between the amounts of products and reactants in a chemical reaction can be expressed i n units of moles or masses
of pure substances, of volumes of solutions, or of vo lumes of gaseous substances. The ideal gas law can be use d to calculate the
volume of gaseous products or reactants as needed. In t he laboratory, gases produced in a reaction are ofte n collected by the
displacement of water from filled vessels; the amount of gas can then be calculated from the volume of wat er displaced and the
atmospheric pressure. A gas collected in such a way i s not pure, however, but contains a significant amount of water vapor. The
measured pressure must therefore be corrected for the vap or pressure of water, which depends strongly on the tempera ture.

3.1.5: Gas V olumes and Chemical Reactions is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
LibreTexts.2
Exercise

3.1.6.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1699793.1.6: Gas Mixtures and Partial Pressures
To determine the contribution of each component gas to t he total pressure of a mixture of gases
In our use of the ideal gas law thus far, we have focuse d entirely on the properties of pure gases with only a single chemical
species. But what happens when two or more gases are mixe d? In this section, we describe how to determine the co ntribution of
each gas present to the total pressure of the mixture.
Partial Pressures
The ideal gas law assumes that all gases behave identically and that their b ehavior is independent of attractive and repulsive fo rces.
If volume and temperature are held constant, the id eal gas equation can be rearranged to show that the pressure of a sample of gas
is directly proportional to the number of moles of gas prese nt:
Nothing in the equation depends on the nature of the gas—only the amount.
With this assumption, let’s suppose we have a mixture of two ideal gases that are present in equal amounts. What is the total
pressure of the mixture? Because the pressure depen ds on only the total number of particles of gas pres ent, the total pressure of the
mixture will simply be twice the pressure of either co mponent. More generally, the total pressure exerted by a mixture of gases at a
given temperature and volume is the sum of the pres sures exerted by each gas alone. Furthermore, if we know t he volume, the
temperature, and the number of moles of each gas in a mixture, then we can calculate the pressure exerted by each gas individually,
which is its partial pressure, the pressure the gas would exe rt if it were the only one present (at the same temperat ure and volume).
To summarize, the total pressure exerted by a mixture of gases is the s um of the partial pressures of component gases. This law
was first discovered by John Dalton, the father of the atomic theory of matter. It is now known as Dalton’ s law of partial pressures.
We can write it mathematically as
where is the total pressure and the other terms are the partial pressures of the individual gases (up to compo nent gases).
Figure: Dalton’s Law. The total pressure of a mixture of gases is the sum of the partial pressures of the indivi dual gases.
For a mixture of two ideal gases, and, we can write an expre ssion for the total pressure:
More generally, for a mixture of component gases, the total p ressure is given byLearning Objectives

3.1.6.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169979Equation restates Equation in a more general form a nd makes it explicitly clear that, at constant tempe rature and
volume, the pressure exerted by a gas depends on only the total number of moles of gas present, whether th e gas is a single
chemical species or a mixture of dozens or even hun dreds of gaseous species. For Equation to be valid, th e identity of the
particles present cannot have an effect. Thus an ide al gas must be one whose properties are not affected by either the size of the
particles or their intermolecular interactions beca use both will vary from one gas to another. The calcul ation of total and partial
pressures for mixtures of gases is illustrated in Exampl e.
Deep-sea divers must use special gas mixtures in the ir tanks, rather than compressed air, to avoid serio us problems, most
notably a condition called “the bends.” At depths of about 350 ft, divers are subject to a pressure of ap proximately 10 atm. A
typical gas cylinder used for such depths contains 51.2 g of and 326.4 g of He and has a volume of 10.0 L. What is the
partial pressure of each gas at 20.00°C, and what is the tot al pressure in the cylinder at this temperature?
Given: masses of components, total volume, and temperature
Asked for: partial pressures and total pressure
Strategy:
A. Calculate the number of moles of and present.
B. Use the ideal gas law to calculate the partial pressure of each gas. Then add together the partial pressures to obta in the total
pressure of the gaseous mixture.
Solution:
A The number of moles of is
The number of moles of is
B We can now use the ideal gas law to calculate the partial pr essure of each:
The total pressure is the sum of the two partial pressur es:
A cylinder of compressed natural gas has a volume of 2 0.0 L and contains 1813 g of methane and 336 g of e thane. Calculate
the partial pressure of each gas at 22.0°C and the tota l pressure in the cylinder.
AnswerExample: The Bends
Exercise

3.1.6.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169979;;
Mole Fractions of Gas Mixtures
The composition of a gas mixture can be described by the mole fractions of the gases present. The mole fraction () of any
component of a mixture is the ratio of the number o f moles of that component to the total number of mo les of all the species
present in the mixture ():
The mole fraction is a dimensionless quantity between 0 and 1. If, then the sample is pure, not a mixtu re. If, then
no is present in the mixture. The sum of the mole fra ctions of all the components present must equal 1.
To see how mole fractions can help us understand the properties of gas mixtures, let’s evaluate the ratio of the pressure of a gas
to the total pressure of a gas mixture that contain s. We can use the ideal gas law to describe the pres sures of both gas and the
mixture: and. The ratio of the two is thus
Rearranging this equation gives
That is, the partial pressure of any gas in a mixtu re is the total pressure multiplied by the mole frac tion of that gas. This conclusion
is a direct result of the ideal gas law, which assumes t hat all gas particles behave ideally. Consequently, th e pressure of a gas in a
mixture depends on only the percentage of particles in the mixture that are of that type, not their spe cific physical or chemical
properties. By volume, Earth’s atmosphere is about 78 %, 21%, and 0.9%, with trace amounts of gases such as,,
and others. This means that 78% of the particles pres ent in the atmosphere are; hence the mole fraction of is 78%/100% =
0.78. Similarly, the mole fractions of and are 0.21 a nd 0.009, respectively. Using Equation 10.6.7, we therefo re know that the
partial pressure of N is 0.78 atm (assuming an atmosp heric pressure of exactly 760 mmHg) and, similarly, the partial pressures of
and are 0.21 and 0.009 atm, respectively.
We have just calculated the partial pressures of the major gases in the air we inhale. Experiments that me asure the composition
of the air we exhale yield different results, however. The following table gives the measured pressures of the major gases in
both inhaled and exhaled air. Calculate the mole fractio ns of the gases in exhaled air.
Inhaled Air / mmHg Exhaled Air / mmHg
597 568
158 116
0.3 28
5 48
8 8
767 767
Given: pressures of gases in inhaled and exhaled air
Asked for: mole fractions of gases in exhaled air
Strategy:
Calculate the mole fraction of each gas using Equation.2
Example: Exhaling Composition

3.1.6.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169979Solution:
The mole fraction of any gas is given by
where is the partial pressure of and is the total pressure. For example, the mole fraction of is given as:
The following table gives the values of for the gases in the exhaled air.
Gas Mole Fraction
0.741
0.151
0.037
0.063
0.010
Venus is an inhospitable place, with a surface tempera ture of 560°C and a surface pressure of 90 atm. The a tmosphere consists
of about 96% CO and 3% N, with trace amounts of othe r gases, including water, sulfur dioxide, and sulfuric acid. Calculate
the partial pressures of CO and N.
Answer
Summary
The partial pressure of each gas in a mixture is prop ortional to its mole fraction. The pressure exerted by each gas in a gas mixture
(its partial pressure) is independent of the pressure exerted by all oth er gases present. Consequently, the total pressure exe rted by
a mixture of gases is the sum of the partial pressures of the components (Dalton’s law of partial pressures). The amount of gas
present in a mixture may be described by its partia l pressure or its mole fraction. The mole fraction of any component of a mixture
is the ratio of the number of moles of that substanc e to the total number of moles of all substances pre sent. In a mixture of gases,
the partial pressure of each gas is the product of the total pressure and the mole fraction of that gas.
3.1.6: Gas Mixtures and Partial Pressures is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.Exercise
2 2
2 2

3.1.7.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/5283753.1.7: Partial Pressures and Stoichiometry
To solve stoichiometry problems involving mixtures of ga ses.
In our use of Dalton's Law thus far, we have focused ent irely on inert gas mixtures where no chemical reaction occurs. But what
happens when two or more gases are mixed and they reac t? In this section, we describe how to solve stoichiomet ry problems using
partial pressures.
Using Partial Pressures
Dalton's Law tells us that the total pressure exerted b y a mixture of gases is the sum of the partial press ures of component
gases. For each of the gases in the mixture, the parti al pressure of a gas in a mixture is directly propo rtional to the mole fraction of
that gas. Given this proportionality, stoichiometry problems involving gas mixtures may be solved in terms of partial
pressures! The use of partial pressures in a stoichiometry calculation for mixtures of gases is illustrated in
the following example.

A sealed, rigid, container holds a 50/50 mixture of nitrogen and hydrogen gas at a total pressure of 1.50 atm. A reaction occurs
as follows:
Assuming that the volume and temperature are constant, what is the final total pressure in the container a fter the reaction has
gone to completion?
Given: mixture ratio, total pressure, chemical reaction
Asked for: total pressure after reaction
Strategy:
A. Set up ICE table in terms of partial pressures.
B. Add together the final partial pressures to obtain the total pressure of the gaseous mixture.
Solution:
A Set up an ICE table in terms of partial pressures. Note that the initial initial total pressure of 1.50 atm must be half due to
nitrogen and half due to hydrogen gas, so each gas is ini tially present with a partial pressure of 0.75 atm.
N 3 H --> 2 NH
Initial 0.75 atm 0.75 atm 0 atm

As we consider the chemical change that occurs, we will recognize that the coefficients from the balanced ch emical equation
may be applied to the partial pressures (since these are proportional to the moles of each gas present.) For example, after
determining that hydrogen gas is the limiting reactant, we may calculate the amount of nitrogen gas that will be co nsumed:
Using these ideas, we can complete the "change" row of the I CE table:Learning Objectives
Example: Partial Pressures and Stoichiometry
2 2 3

3.1.7.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/528375 N 3 H --> 2 NH
Initial 0.75 atm 0.75 atm 0 atm
Change -0.25 atm -0.75 atm +0.50 arm
Completing the table by summing down the columns, we hav e the following completed ICE table, in units of atm:
N 3 H --> 2 NH
Initial 0.75 atm 0.75 atm 0 atm
Change -0.25 atm -0.75 atm +0.50 atm
End 0.50 atm 0 atm 0.50 atm
At the end of this reaction, the container would hold a mixtur e of N (the excess reactant) and NH (the product).
B We can now sum the end partial pressures to calculate the total pressure in the container:
Samples of oxygen gas and xenon gas are added to an evacuated container of fixed volume and the followin g reaction occurs
forming a yellow solid:
Xe(g) + 2 O (g) → XeO (s)
The initial partial pressure of the oxygen gas is 2. 0 atm and that of the xenon gas is 0.7 atm. After the reaction has gone to
completion, what is the total pressure inside the contai ner? The temperature remained constant. Note: the so lid product will
NOT contribute to the gas pressure.
Answer
P = 0.6 atm (note, in this case, the total pressure is simply the pressure of the excess reactant)
Warning: Not All Pressures Are Partial Pressures!
Remember, partial pressures are used to describe a mixture of gases. The above example problem begain with gases in a single
container, all mixed together. However, many problems you encounter may start with the gases separated. Consi der the
situation illustrated in Example \(\ PageIndex {2}\).
Consider the apparatus pictured below, which consists of t wo containers separated by a valve.
The valve is opened and the gases react as follows (n ote that the temperature is high enough that the wat er is produced as a
gas):
4 C H N(g) + 15 O (g) → 8 CO (g) + 14 H O(g) + 2 N (g)
2 2 3
2 2 3
2 3
Exercise
2 4
total
Example: Bulbs Separated by Valves
2 7 2 2 2 2

3.1.7.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/528375What will be the total pressure in the apparatus when t he reaction has gone to completion? Assume that the temperature does
not change.
---------------Given: pressure and volume of each gas prior to the valve bei ng open, chemical equation
Asked for: the total pressure in the apparatus when the reaction h as gone to completion
Strategy: In this problem, we must consider two processes: each gas expands to fill the entire system, and the gases re act with
one another. These two processes actually occur at the s ame time, but we must treat them as if the expansion occur s first.
Solution:
First we will calculate the pressure that each gas exerts after expanding to fill the container:
The C H N expands from 285 mL to 704 mL (285 mL + 419 mL):
591 torr × 285 mL = P × 704 mL
P = 239.25 torr
The O expands from 419 mL to 704 mL:
1766 torr × 419 mL = P × 704 mL
P = 1051.07 torr
Now, we consider the reaction. Since the volume of the e ntire system and the temperature are constant, we can do our
stoichiometry using partial pressures. (Note that we can not use the pressures given in the problem to do stoic hiometry!) Here
is an ICE table for the reaction. Note that C H N is the limit ing reactant here.)

4 C H N + 15 O →8 CO + 14 H O + 2 N
Initial 239.25 torr 1051.07 torr 0 torr 0 torr 0 tor r
Change –239.25 torr –897.19 torr +478.50 torr +837.38 torr +119.63 torr
End 0 torr 153.88 torr 478.50 torr 837.38 torr 119.6 3 torr
Finally, we calculate the total pressure in the system after the reaction:
153.88 torr + 478.50 torr + 837.38 torr + 199.63 torr = 1590 torr (rounded from 1589 torr)

Summary
The partial pressure of each gas in a mixture is prop ortional to its mole fraction. Partial pressures may be used in solving
stoichiometry problems.
3.1.7: Partial Pressures and Stoichiometry is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.2 7
2 7
2 7 2 2 2 2

3.1.8.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1699803.1.8: Kinetic-Molecular Theory
To understand the significance of the kinetic molecular theory of gases.
The laws that describe the behavior of gases were well e stablished long before anyone had developed a coher ent model of the
properties of gases. In this section, we introduce a t heory that describes why gases behave the way they do. The theory we
introduce can also be used to derive laws such as the ideal gas law from fundamental principles and the pr operties of individual
particles.
A Molecular Description
The kinetic molecular theory of gases explains the l aws that describe the behavior of gases. Developed du ring the mid-19th century
by several physicists, including the Austrian Ludwig B oltzmann (1844–1906), the German Rudolf Clausius (1822 –1888), and the
Englishman James Clerk Maxwell (1831–1879), who is also known for his contributions to electricity and magnet ism, this theory
is based on the properties of individual particles as defined for an ideal gas and the fundamental con cepts of physics. Thus the
kinetic molecular theory of gases provides a molecul ar explanation for observations that led to the dev elopment of the ideal gas
law. The kinetic molecular theory of gases is based on the f ollowing five postulates:
1. A gas is composed of a large number of particles calle d molecules (whether monatomic or polyatomic) that are in c onstant
random motion.
2. Because the distance between gas molecules is much greate r than the size of the molecules, the volume of the molecul es is
negligible.
3. Intermolecular interactions, whether repulsive or attr active, are so weak that they are also negligible.
4. Gas molecules collide with one another and with the walls of the container, but these collisions are perfectly ela stic; that is,
they do not change the average kinetic energy of the m olecules.
5. The average kinetic energy of the molecules of any g as depends on only the temperature, and at a given temp erature, all
gaseous molecules have exactly the same average kinetic e nergy.
Although the molecules of real gases have nonzero vo lumes and exert both attractive and repulsive forces on one another, for the
moment we will focus on how the kinetic molecular theor y of gases relates to the properties of gases we have been discussing. In
the following sections, we explain how this theory must be mod ified to account for the behavior of real gases.
Figure: Visualizing molecular motion. Molecules of a gas are in constant motion and collide with one another and with the
container wall.
Postulates 1 and 4 state that gas molecules are in co nstant motion and collide frequently with the walls of their containers. The
collision of molecules with their container walls res ults in a momentum transfer (impulse) from molecules to the walls (Figure
).Learning Objectives
five postulates of Kinetic Molecular Theory

3.1.8.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169980
Figure: Momentum transfer (impulse) from a molecule t o the container wall as it bounces off the wall. and are the
component of the molecular velocity and the momentu m transferred to the wall, respectively. The wall is p erpendicular to axis.
Since the collisions are elastic, the molecule bounces b ack with the same velocity in the opposite direction.
The momentum transfer to the wall perpendicular to axis as a molecule with an initial velocity in direction hits is expressed
as:
The collision frequency, a number of collisions of the molecules to the wall per unit area and per second, increases with the
molecular speed and the number of molecules per unit volu me.
The pressure the gas exerts on the wall is expressed as the p roduct of impulse and the collision frequency.
At any instant, however, the molecules in a gas sample a re traveling at different speed. Therefore, we must rep lace in the
expression above with the average value of, which is denoted by. The overbar designates the average valu e over all
molecules.
The exact expression for pressure is given as:
Finally, we must consider that there is nothing special abou t direction. We should expect that
Here the quantity is called the mean-square speed defined as the average value of square-speed () over all molecules. Since
for each molecule, then
By substituting for in the expression above, we can ge t the final expression for the pressure:
Because volumes and intermolecular interactions are negligible, postulates 2 and 3 state that all gaseous particles behave
identically, regardless of the chemical nature of th eir component molecules. This is the essence of the ideal gas law, which treats all
gases as collections of particles that are identical in all respects except mass. Postulate 2 also explains wh y it is relatively easy to
compress a gas; you simply decrease the distance between t he gas molecules.
Postulate 5 provides a molecular explanation for the temperature of a gas. Postulate 5 refers to the average translational kinetic
energy of the molecules of a gas, which can be represented:

3.1.8.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169980where is the Avogadro's constant. In Chemistry 101A, we will most commonly discuss the average translational kinetic energy
of 1 mole of molecules. This can be obtained by multiplyin g the above equation by:
where equals the molar mass of the gas in kg/mol. Thus, the average translational kinetic energy,, of the gas (in units
of J/mol) can be expressed as:
By rearranging the equation, we can get the relation ship between the root-mean square speed () and the t emperature. The rms
speed () is the square root of the sum of the squared spee ds divided by the number of particles:
where is the number of particles and is the speed o f particle.
The relationship between and the temperature is given by:
In Equation, has units of meters per second; conseq uently, the units of molar mass are kilograms per m ole,
temperature is expressed in kelvins, and the ideal ga s constant has the value 8.3145 J/(K•mol). Equation s hows that
of a gas is proportional to the square root of its Ke lvin temperature and inversely proportional to the sq uare root of its molar
mass. The root mean-square speed of a gas increase with increasing temperature. At a given temperature, heavier gas molecules
have slower speeds than do lighter ones.
The rms speed and the average speed do not differ gre atly (typically by less than 10%). The distinction is important, however,
because the rms speed is the speed of a gas particle that has average kinetic energy. Particles of diffe rent gases at the same
temperature have the same average kinetic energy, no t the same average speed. In contrast, the most proba ble speed () is the
speed at which the greatest number of particles is m oving. If the average kinetic energy of the particle s of a gas increases linearly
with increasing temperature, then Equation tells us that the rms speed must also increase with temperature because the mass
of the particles is constant. At higher temperatures, t herefore, the molecules of a gas move more rapidly than at lower temperatures,
and increases.
The speeds of eight particles were found to be 1.0, 4.0, 4.0, 6.0, 6.0, 6.0, 8.0, and 10.0 m/s. Calculate their average speed ()
root mean square speed (), and most probable speed ().
Given: particle speeds
Asked for: average speed (), root mean square speed (), and most prob able speed ()
Strategy:
Use Equation to calculate the average speed and Equa tion to calculate the rms speed. Find the most probabl e speed
by determining the speed at which the greatest numbe r of particles is moving.
Solution:
The average speed is the sum of the speeds divided by the nu mber of particles:
The rms speed is the square root of the sum of the squared sp eeds divided by the number of particles:Example

3.1.8.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169980The most probable speed is the speed at which the gre atest number of particles is moving. Of the eight part icles, three have
speeds of 6.0 m/s, two have speeds of 4.0 m/s, and t he other three particles have different speeds. Hence m/s. The
of the particles, which is related to the average kinetic energy, is greater than their average speed.
Boltzmann Distributions
At any given time, what fraction of the molecules in a particular sample has a given speed? Some of the mol ecules will be moving
more slowly than average, and some will be moving faste r than average, but how many in each situation? Answers to questions
such as these can have a substantial effect on the am ount of product formed during a chemical reaction. T his problem was solved
mathematically by Maxwell in 1866; he used statistical analysis to obtain an equation that describes the distr ibution of molecular
speeds at a given temperature. Typical curves showing t he distributions of speeds of molecules at several t emperatures are
displayed in Figure. Increasing the temperature has two effects. First, the peak of the curve moves to the right because the
most probable speed increases. Second, the curve becomes broader because of the increased spread of the speeds. Thus increased
temperature increases the value of the most probable speed but decreases the relati ve number of molecules that have that speed.
Although the mathematics behind curves such as those in Figure were first worked out by Maxwell, the curves a re almost
universally referred to as Boltzmann distributions, a fter one of the other major figures responsible for the kinetic molecular theory
of gases.
Figure The Distributions of Molecular Speeds for a Sam ple of Nitrogen Gas at Various Temperatures. Increasing the
temperature increases both the most probable speed (giv en at the peak of the curve) and the width of the c urve.
The Relationships among Pressure, Volume, and Temperature
We now describe how the kinetic molecular theory of g ases explains some of the important relationships we have discussed
previously.
Pressure versus Volume: At constant temperature, the kinetic energy of the molecul es of a gas and hence the rms speed remain
unchanged. If a given gas sample is allowed to occupy a larg er volume, then the speed of the molecules does not chang e, but the
density of the gas (number of particles per unit volume) decreases, and the average distance between the molecu les increases.
Hence the molecules must, on average, travel farther betwee n collisions. They therefore collide with one another a nd with the
walls of their containers less often, leading to a decrease in pressure. Conversely, increasing the pressure forces the m olecules
closer together and increases the density, until the col lective impact of the collisions of the molecules with th e container walls
just balances the applied pressure.
Volume versus Temperature: Raising the temperature of a gas increases the average k inetic energy and therefore the rms
speed (and the average speed) of the gas molecules. Hence as the temperature increases, the molecules collide with the wa lls of
their containers more frequently and with greater force. This increases the pressure, unless the volume increases to reduce the

3.1.8.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169980pressure, as we have just seen. Thus an increase in temper ature must be offset by an increase in volume for the net impact
(pressure) of the gas molecules on the container walls to rem ain unchanged.
Pressure of Gas Mixtures: Postulate 3 of the kinetic molecular theory of gases states t hat gas molecules exert no attractive or
repulsive forces on one another. If the gaseous molecules do not interact, then the presence of one gas in a gas mixtu re will have
no effect on the pressure exerted by another, and Dalton’ s law of partial pressures holds.
The temperature of a 4.75 L container of N gas is incr eased from 0°C to 117°C. What is the qualitative eff ect of this change
on the
a. average kinetic energy of the N molecules?
b. rms speed of the N molecules?
c. average speed of the N molecules?
d. impact of each N molecule on the wall of the container d uring a collision with the wall?
e. total number of collisions per second of N molecules wi th the walls of the entire container?
f. number of collisions per second of N molecules with ea ch square centimeter of the container wall?
g. pressure of the N gas?
Given: temperatures and volume
Asked for: effect of increase in temperature
Strategy:
Use the relationships among pressure, volume, and tempera ture to predict the qualitative effect of an increa se in the
temperature of the gas.
Solution:
a. Increasing the temperature increases the average kine tic energy of the N molecules.
b. An increase in average kinetic energy can be due only to an increase in the rms speed of the gas particles.
c. If the rms speed of the N molecules increases, the aver age speed also increases.
d. If, on average, the particles are moving faster, then t hey strike the container walls with more energy.
e. Because the particles are moving faster, they collide with the walls of the container more often per unit time.
f. The number of collisions per second of N molecules wi th each square centimeter of container wall increases b ecause the
total number of collisions has increased, but the volume occupied by the gas and hence the total area of the walls are
unchanged.
g. The pressure exerted by the N gas increases when the t emperature is increased at constant volume, as predicted b y the
ideal gas law.
A sample of helium gas is confined in a cylinder with a gas-tight sliding piston. The initial volume is 1.34 L, and the
temperature is 22°C. The piston is moved to allow the gas to expand to 2.12 L at constant temperature. What is the qualitative
effect of this change on the
a. average kinetic energy of the He atoms?
b. rms speed of the He atoms?
c. average speed of the He atoms?
d. impact of each He atom on the wall of the container dur ing a collision with the wall?
e. total number of collisions per second of He atoms with the walls of the entire container?
f. number of collisions per second of He atoms with eac h square centimeter of the container wall?
g. pressure of the He gas?
Answer a
no changeExample
Exercise

3.1.8.6 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169980Answer b
no change
Answer c
no change
Answer d
no change
Answer e
decreases
Answer f
decreases
Answer g
decreases
Summary
The kinetic molecular theory of gases provides a mol ecular explanation for the observations that led to the d evelopment of the
ideal gas law.
Average kinetic energy:
Root mean square speed:
The behavior of ideal gases is explained by the kinetic molecular theory of gases. Molecular motion, which leads to collisions
between molecules and the container walls, explains pr essure, and the large intermolecular distances in gas es explain their high
compressibility. Although all gases have the same avera ge kinetic energy at a given temperature, they do n ot all possess the same
root mean square (rms) speed (v). The actual values of speed and kinetic energy are not the same for all particles of a gas but
are given by a Boltzmann distribution, in which some molecules have higher or lower speeds (and kine tic energies) than average.
3.1.8: Kinetic-Molecular Theory is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.rms

3.1.9.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169981Grouped Frequency Distribution for a Collection of E xam Scores
Score 0-9 10-19 20-29 30-39 40-49 50-59 60-69 70-79 80-89 90-100 (0 -100)
Frequency 0 2 4 8 10 12 22 15 11 4 (88)3.1.9: Understanding the Value Distribution of a Variable
Discrete and Continuous Variables
Variables such as number of children in a household are called discrete variables since the possible values are discrete points on the
scale. For example, a household could have three child ren or six children, but not 4.53 children. Other variab les, such as
percentage of class points earned, are continuous variables since the scale is continuo us and not made up of discrete steps. The
percentage could be 82.5%, or it could be 82.5149087 %. Of course, the limitations of measurement, or the r ealities of keeping a
grade book, preclude many variables from ever being truly continuous, but when measured with enough precisi on these variables
are considered continuous for practical purposes.
Grouped Frequency Distribution for a Variable
The frequency distribution for a variable consists of possible values for that variable and a count of t he number of occurrences of
each group of values. Consider the following grouped f requency distribution for a collection of exam scor es. Typically, a grouped
frequency distribution is portrayed using a histogram.
Continuous Distribution for a Variable (Probability Density)
The histogram above portrays the actual scores from th e 88 students that took this single exam in Spring 2013. However, suppose
we plan to give this same exam to thousands of chemist ry 101A students all throughout the state and we want to know the
occurrence probability for scores between 60 and 100 percent. (That’s just an other way to say we want to know what fraction of
scores will be between 60 and 100 percent.) In order to accur ately answer this question, we need a reasonable model for the
distribution of possible values.
Mathematical equations are often used to define cont inuous distributions and these models are used to answe r exactly this type of
question. (Continuous distributions can also be cal led probability densities.) The normal distribution or “bell curve” is, perhaps, the
best known example of a continuous distribution. Many empirical distributions are approximated well by mat hematical
distributions such as the normal distribution. An exam ple of a normal distribution is shown below. Many exam score distributions
are modeled using a similar curve.

3.1.9.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169981
The y-axis in the distribution technically represents the “fract ion per unit” or the "probability density." You do n ot use the actual yaxis values very often and no y-values are shown in the image above. Intuitively, the y-axis value tells you the chance of obtaining
values near corresponding points on the x-axis. In the normal distribution pictured, the probability of an observat ion with a value
near 40 is about half of the probability of an observation with value near 50. The most probable value is the value of x
corresponding to the highest value of y (the “peak” o f the curve.) In the normal distribution pictured, 55 the most probable value of
x.
Although we will not discuss the concept of a continuous dist ribution in great detail, you must be familiar with the foll owing ideas:
1) The fraction of sample values equal to an exact single value of x is a very small number! Consider our exam score
example. What fraction of exams will have a score equ al to exactly 82.31 percent? That’s a ridiculously specific score! So, it
should make sense that the fraction of exams that hav e that score is going to be a very, very, very small n umber. The fraction
of exams that will have a score equal to exactly 82.31956432342346576 percent is essentially zero. (We can make the
fraction as close as we like to zero by making the exam s core more and more precise.)
2) Continuous distributions are best used to determine the fraction of sample with values within a range of x values.
Again, consider the exam score example. What fraction of exams will have a score between 80 and 90 percent? That will be
a significant portion of the sample and we would expe ct that the fraction of exams with scores within that range will be much
larger than the fraction for a single score (as described above.)
3) The fraction of area under the curve in any particular region tells you the frac tion of the sample with values within
that range. For a normalized distribution, the total area under the curve equals 1. Suppose that one tenth of the exam
scores are between 80 and 90 percent. This can be se en in the distribution plot! The continuous distribut ion for the scores
would have a shape that places one tenth of the area below th e curve in the region bounded by 80 and 90 on the x-axis.
3.1.9: Understanding the Value Distribution of a Vari able is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated
by LibreTexts.

3.1.10.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1699823.1.10: Molecular Speed Distribution
Distributions of the Value of Molecular Speed
In the mid-19 century, James Maxwell and Ludwig Boltzm ann derived an equation for the distribution of mol ecular speeds in a
gas. Graphing this equation gives us the Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution of speeds. The Maxwell-Boltzmann speed distribution
curve for N at 25ºC is shown below.
For example, when the speed is 500 m/sec, the y value is 0.00185. This tells us that the fraction of mo lecules that have speeds near
500 m/sec is 0.00185. Note: if you are struggling with the concept of the fraction, translate it into a pe rcentage (multiply by 100):
0.185% of the molecules have speeds in this range. Th e higher the curve at a given speed, the more molecu les travel at that speed.
For example, many molecules have speeds around 500 m/sec, whereas few molecules have speeds around 1000 m/sec.
The speed that corresponds to the peak of the curve is called the most probable speed. More molecules travel at (or close to) this
speed than any other. For N at 25ºC, the most probable speed is 421 m/sec. The average speed is a little larger than the most
probable speed. For N at 25ºC, the average speed is 4 75 m/sec. The root-mean-square speed is the speed that corresponds to the
average kinetic energy of the molecules. For N at 25ºC, th e root-mean-square speed is 515 m/sec.
For any gas, these speeds can be calculated by the following formulas:
most probable speed:
average speed:
root-mean-square speed:
where is the kelvin temperature, is the gas constan t expressed in units of J/mol-K (8.314 J/mol-K), and i s the molar mass of
the gas expressed in units of kg/mol.
Fraction of Molecules in a Wide Range of Speeds
Suppose we wanted to know the fraction of molecules that have speeds in a wide range, say 500 to 1000 m/sec. In principle, we
could add up the fractions for each individual speed in this range, just as we added up the sizes of the bars in our histogram.th

3.1.10.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169982However, in practice this is not practical, because the re would be way too many “bars” to add up (for this pa rticular range we’d
need to add up 500 “bars”!!) A far better way to dete rmine the fraction of molecules in a wide range of spe eds is to measure the
area of the region under the Maxwell-Boltzmann curve.
The area under the entire Maxwell-Boltzmann curve is exactly 1. Therefore, the area under any part of th e curve equals the fraction
of molecules in the corresponding velocity range.
For example, if we want to determine the fraction of m olecules that have velocities between 500 and 1000 m/ sec, we need to
measure the area of the shaded region below.
There are several ways to estimate this area. The simpl est, which you will do in the lab, is to cut out and we igh the graph. In
principle, we could use calculus to determine the exac t area under the curve, since the equation that gen erates the MaxwellBoltzmann curve is known. Unfortunately, this equatio n cannot be integrated analytically. If you’re curi ous, though, the area of the
shaded region is 0.392, so the fraction of molecules that have speeds between 500 and 1000 m/sec is 0.392. (As always, we can
think of this as a percentage: 39.2%.)
The Shape of a Speed Distribution Curve
A great deal of information about a gas can be glea ned by considering the overall shape of the speed d istribution curve. The speed
distribution curve shape will vary with both temperature a nd molar mass of the gas.
Speed Distributions at Different Temperatures

3.1.10.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169982When we consider a gas at increasing temperature:
The Maxwell-Boltzmann curve spreads and flattens out.
The most probable speed increases (the peak shifts to the right).
The fraction of fast-moving molecules increases.
The fraction of slow-moving molecules decreases.
Consider the following distributions showing nitrogen gas at four different temperatures.
Observe that when the temperature goes up, the particles in a gas tend to move faster. As a result, the entire distribution shifts to the
right, toward higher speeds. When we raise the temperat ure, the most probable speed increases (the highest point on the curve
shifts to the right). In addition, the entire curve g ets wider and lower: we have a wider range of speeds, b ut we have fewer
molecules at the most probable speed.
Also, when we raise the temperature, the fraction of m olecules moving at high speeds increases. For example, when we raise the
temperature from 25ºC to 300ºC, the fraction of molecules moving faster than 800 m/sec becomes larger.

3.1.10.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169982
Likewise, when we raise the temperature, the fraction of molecules moving at low speeds decreases. For example, when we raise
the temperature from 25ºC to 300ºC, the fraction of molecu les moving slower than 800 m/sec becomes smaller.
Speed Distribution Curves for Different Molar Masses
When we consider gases of increasing molar mass:
The Maxwell-Boltzmann curve gets taller and narrower.
The most probable speed decreases (the peak shifts left).
The fraction of fast-moving molecules decreases.
The fraction of slow-moving molecules increases.
Consider the following Maxwell-Boltzmann speed distribut ion curves for three different gases.

3.1.10.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169982
Observe that the gas with the lowest molar mass (helium) has the highest molecular speeds, while the gas with t he highest molar
mass (xenon) has the lowest molecular speeds. When we i ncrease the molar mass, the most probable speed decrea ses (the highest
point on the curve shifts to the left). In addition, the entire curve gets narrower and taller: we have a smaller range of speeds, but we
have more molecules at the most probable speed.
For each of the following pairs of quantities, tell whi ch one is larger and explain your answer. If they are equal, say so and
explain how you can tell. (“KE” means kinetic energy)
a) The rms velocity of nitrogen at 25ºC or the rms velocit y of oxygen at 75ºC.
b) The average velocity of hydrogen or the average veloci ty of helium at the same temperature.
c) The fraction of molecules with velocities greate r than 500 m/sec, or the fraction of molecules with
velocities greater than 500 m/sec at the same temperatu re.
Example: Which is larger?

3.1.10.6 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169982Solutions:
a) Oxygen at 75ºC is larger. The rms velocity depends on both the molar mass and the temperature, so it is easiest to just
calculate the rms velocity for each gas, v for N is 515 m/s and for O is 521 m/s.
b) Hydrogen is larger. If the temperature is constant, the velo city distribution is inversely dependent on the mol ar mass;
the smaller the molar mass, the faster the molecules.
c) The fraction of CH molecules with velocities greater than 500 m/sec is larger. This is similar to part c. The gas with
the smaller molar mass will have a larger fraction of “fast molecules” and a smaller fraction of “slow mol ecules”, no
matter where we choose the cutoff between “fast” and “slow”.

3.1.10: Molecular Speed Distribution is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.rms 2 2

3.1.11.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1699833.1.11: Kinetic Energy Distribution
Distributions of the Value of Molecular Kinetic Energy
The Maxwell-Boltzmann equation can also be expressed in terms of the distribution of molecular kinetic en ergies in a gas.
Graphing this equation gives us the Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution of kinetic energies. The Maxwell-Boltzmann kinetic energy
distribution curve for N at 25ºC is shown below.
For instance, the fraction of molecules that have kine tic energies near 4000. J/mol (the range 4000 ± 0.5 J/mol) is 0.000115.
Another way to say the same thing is: “0.0115% of the nitr ogen molecules have kinetic energies near 4000. J/mol.”
We can measure the fraction of molecules having a wid e range of energies by measuring the area under the curve. For instance, the
fraction of area of the shaded region is 0.467, so th e fraction of nitrogen molecules that have energies between 2000 and 6000
J/mol is 0.467 (that’s 46.7%). Recall that the total area u nder this curve is exactly 1.
The kinetic energy corresponding to the peak of the curve is called the most probable kinetic energy. The average kinetic energy
is much larger than the most probable kinetic energy. For any gas, these kinetic energy values can be cal culated by the following
formulas:
most probable kinetic energy,:2

3.1.11.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169983average kinetic energy,:
where is the kelvin temperature, is the gas constant expressed in units of J/mol-K (8.314 J/mol-K). For N at 2 5ºC, the most
probable KE is 1240 J/mol and the average KE is 3720 J/mo l.
The Shape of a Kinetic Energy Distribution Curve
The kinetic energy distribution curve shape will vary with temperature only. The shape of the kinetic ene rgy distribution is
independent of the molar mass of the gas.
When we consider a gas at increasing temperature:
The Kinetic Energy distribution curve spreads and flat tens out.
The most probable kinetic energy increases (the peak shi fts to the right).
The fraction of higher-energy molecules increases.
The fraction of lower-energy molecules decreases.
Consider the following graphs for nitrogen gas at 25ºC, 250ºC, and 500ºC. Increasing the temperature increas es the most probable
KE, and it shifts the entire graph toward higher kineti c energies. Note the change in shape of the distributio n. Notice that at higher
temperatures, the fraction of molecules with kinetic energies higher than a particular value, such as 400 0 J/mol, increases
significantly.2

3.1.11.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169983
Note that the kinetic energy distribution is the same for any gas, as long as the gases are at the same t emperature. The mass of the
individual particles has no effect on the shape of kinetic energy distribution. The graph shown for N at 25ºC can represent the
kinetic energy distribution of H, He, O, CO, Ar, Xe, or any o ther substance that is a gas at 25ºC.
When we consider different gases at the same temperature:
The Kinetic Energy distribution curves are identical.
The shape of a kinetic energy distribution curve is inde pendent of molar mass.
For each of the following pairs of quantities, tell whi ch one is larger and explain your answer. If they are equal, say so and
explain how you can tell. (“KE” means kinetic energy)
a) The most probable KE for argon at 25ºC or the most proba ble KE for neon at 25ºC.
b) The fraction of He atoms with kinetic energies betwe en 100 and 200 J/mol, or the fraction of Ne atoms with kinetic
energies between 100 and 200 J/mol, if both gases are at 100 ºC.
Solutions:
a) They have the same most probable kinetic energies. The kinetic energy distribution depends only on temper ature.
b) Exactly the same fraction of atoms with kinetic energies in any range we select.To work th is out, we must recognize
that the kinetic energy distribution depends only o n temperature, not on molar mass. Therefore, the hel ium and the neon
will have exactly the same fraction of atoms with kinetic en ergies in any range we select.
3.1.11: Kinetic Energy Distribution is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.2
2 2 2
Example: Which is larger?

3.1.12.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1699843.1.12: Molecular Effusion and Diffusion
To understand the significance of the kinetic molecular theory of gases
We now describe how the kinetic molecular theory of g ases explains some of the important relationships we have discussed
previously.
Diffusion and Effusion
As you have learned, the molecules of a gas are not stationary but in constant and random motion. If so meone opens a bottle of
perfume in the next room, for example, you are likel y to be aware of it soon. Your sense of smell relies on molecules of the
aromatic substance coming into contact with specializ ed olfactory cells in your nasal passages, which contai n specific receptors
(protein molecules) that recognize the substance. How do the molecules responsible for the aroma get from the perfume bottle to
your nose? You might think that they are blown by dr afts, but, in fact, molecules can move from one plac e to another even in a
draft-free environment.
Diffusion is the gradual mixing of gases due to the motion of their component particles even in the absence of m echanical agitation
such as stirring. The result is a gas mixture with uni form composition. Diffusion is also a property of the pa rticles in liquids and
liquid solutions and, to a lesser extent, of solids a nd solid solutions. The related process, effusion, is the escape of gaseous
molecules through a small (usually microscopic) hole, suc h as a hole in a balloon, into an evacuated space.
The phenomenon of effusion had been known for thousan ds of years, but it was not until the early 19th centu ry that quantitative
experiments related the rate of effusion to molecul ar properties. The rate of effusion of a gaseous subst ance is inversely
proportional to the square root of its molar mass. This relationship is referred to as Graham’ s law, after the Scottish chemist
Thomas Graham (1805–1869). The ratio of the effusion r ates of two gases is the square root of the inverse r atio of their molar
masses:
Heavy molecules effuse through a porous material more sl owly than light molecules, as illustrated schematical ly in Figure
for ethylene oxide and helium. Helium (M = 4.00 g/mol) effuses much more rapidly than ethylen e oxide (M = 44.0 g/mol). Because
helium is less dense than air, helium-filled balloons “float” at the end of a tethering string. Unfortunat ely, rubber balloons filled
with helium soon lose their buoyancy along with much of their volume. In contrast, rubber balloons filled wi th air tend to retain
their shape and volume for a much longer time. Becau se helium has a molar mass of 4.00 g/mol, whereas air ha s an average molar
mass of about 29 g/mol, pure helium effuses through the microscopic pores in the rubber balloon times fa ster than air.
For this reason, high-quality helium-filled balloons a re usually made of Mylar, a dense, strong, opaque mate rial with a high
molecular mass that forms films that have many fewer po res than rubber. Hence, mylar balloons can retain their heli um for days.Learning Objectives

3.1.12.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169984
Figure: The Relative Rates of Effusion of Two Gases wit h Different Masses. The lighter He atoms (M = 4.00 g/mol) effuse
through the small hole more rapidly than the heavier ethylene oxide (C H O) molecules (M = 44.0 g/mol), as predicted by
Graham’s law.
At a given temperature, heavier molecules move more slowly than lighter molecules.
During World War II, scientists working on the first at omic bomb were faced with the challenge of finding a way to obtain
large amounts of. Naturally occurring uranium is on ly 0.720%, whereas most of the rest (99.275%) is, whi ch is
not fissionable (i.e., it will not break apart to rel ease nuclear energy) and also actually poisons the fi ssion process. Because
both isotopes of uranium have the same reactivity, t hey cannot be separated chemically. Instead, a proce ss of gaseous effusion
was developed using the volatile compound (boiling poi nt = 56°C).
1. Calculate the ratio of the rates of effusion of UF an d UF for a single step in which UF is allowed to pass through a
porous barrier. (The atomic mass of U is 235.04, and the atomic mass of U is 238.05.)
2. If n identical successive separation steps are used, the over all separation is given by the separation in a single step (in this
case, the ratio of effusion rates) raised to the nth power. How many effusion steps are needed to obtain 99.0% pu re UF?
Given: isotopic content of naturally occurring uranium an d atomic masses of U and U
Asked for: ratio of rates of effusion and number of effusio n steps needed to obtain 99.0% pure UF
Strategy:
A. Calculate the molar masses of UF and UF, and then use Grah am’s law to determine the ratio of the effusion rates.
Use this value to determine the isotopic content of UF aft er a single effusion step.
B. Divide the final purity by the initial purity to obta in a value for the number of separation steps needed to a chieve the
desired purity. Use a logarithmic expression to compute the n umber of separation steps required.
Solution:
A The first step is to calculate the molar mass of UF containing U and U. Luckily for the success of the sep aration
method, fluorine consists of a single isotope of atomic mas s 18.998. The molar mass of UF is
234.04 + (6)(18.998) = 349.03 g/mol
The molar mass of UF is
238.05 + (6)(18.998) = 352.04 g/mol
The difference is only 3.01 g/mol (less than 1%). The ratio of the effusion rates can be calculated from Grah am’s law using
Equation:
B To obtain 99.0% pure UF requires many steps. We can set up an equation that relates the initial and fi nal purity to the
number of times the separation process is repeated:
final purity = (initial purity)(separation)2 4
Example
23562386 6
235 238
235 238
6235 238
n

3.1.12.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169984In this case, 0.990 = (0.00720)(1.0043), which can be rear ranged to give
Taking the logarithm of both sides gives
Thus at least a thousand effusion steps are necessary t o obtain highly enriched U. Below is a small part of a system that is
used to prepare enriched uranium on a large scale.
A Portion of a Plant for Separating Uranium Isotopes b y Effusion of UF The large cylindrical objects (note t he human for
scale) are so-called diffuser (actually effuser) units, in which gaseous UF is pumped through a porous barrier to partially
separate the isotopes. The UF must be passed through mult iple units to become substantially enriched in U.
Helium consists of two isotopes: He (natural abundance = 0.000134%) and He (natural abundance = 99.999866%). Their
atomic masses are 3.01603 and 4.00260, respectively. He lium-3 has unique physical properties and is used in the study of
ultralow temperatures. It is separated from the more abu ndant He by a process of gaseous effusion.
a. Calculate the ratio of the effusion rates of He and He an d thus the enrichment possible in a single effusion step.
b. How many effusion steps are necessary to yield 99.0% pure He?
Answer a
ratio of effusion rates = 1.15200; one step gives 0.0001 54% He
Answer b
96 steps
Rates of Diffusion or Effusion
Graham’s law is an empirical relationship that states tha t the ratio of the rates of diffusion or effusion of two gases is the square
root of the inverse ratio of their molar masses. The relationship is based on the postulate that all gases at the same temperature have
the same average kinetic energy. We can write the exp ression for the average kinetic energy of two gases with different molar
masses:
Multiplying both sides by 2 and rearranging given
6.
Exercise
3 4
3 4

3.1.12.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169984Taking the square root of both sides gives
Thus the rate at which a molecule, or a mole of mole cules, diffuses or effuses is directly related to the s peed at which it moves.
Equation shows that Graham’s law is a direct consequen ce of the fact that gaseous molecules at the same temp erature have
the same average kinetic energy.
Typically, gaseous molecules have a speed of hundreds of meters per second (hundreds of miles per hour). Th e effect of molar mass
on these speeds is dramatic, as illustrated in Figure for some common gases. Because all gases have the same average
kinetic energy, according to the Boltzmann distribut ion, molecules with lower masses, such as hydrogen and h elium, have a wider
distribution of speeds.
Figure: The Wide Variation in Molecular Speeds Observ ed at 298 K for Gases with Different Molar Masses
The lightest gases have a wider distribution of speeds and t he highest average speeds.
Molecules with lower masses have a wider distribution of speed s and a higher average speed.
Gas molecules do not diffuse nearly as rapidly as thei r very high speeds might suggest. If molecules actua lly moved through a
room at hundreds of miles per hour, we would detect o dors faster than we hear sound. Instead, it can take several minutes for us to
detect an aroma because molecules are traveling in a medium with other gas molecules. Because gas molecul es collide as often as
10 times per second, changing direction and speed with each collision, they do not diffuse across a room in a straight line, as
illustrated schematically in Figure.
Figure: The Path of a Single Particle in a Gas Sample. The frequent changes in direction are the result of c ollisions with
other gas molecules and with the walls of the containe r.10

3.1.12.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169984The average distance traveled by a molecule between collisions is the mean free path. The denser the gas, the shorter the mean free
path; conversely, as density decreases, the mean free path becomes longer because collisions occur less fr equently. At 1 atm
pressure and 25°C, for example, an oxygen or nitrogen molecule in the atmosphere travels only about 6.0 × 10 m (60 nm)
between collisions. In the upper atmosphere at about 100 km altitude, where gas density is much lower, the m ean free path is about
10 cm; in space between galaxies, it can be as long as 1 × 10 m (about 6 million miles).
The denser the gas, the shorter the mean free path.
Calculate the rms speed of a sample -butene (C H) at 20°C.
Given: compound and temperature
Asked for: rms speed
Strategy:
Calculate the molar mass of cis-2-butene. Be certain that all quantities are expressed in the appropriate units and then use
Equation 10.8.5 to calculate the rms speed of the gas.
Solution:
To use Equation 10.8.4, we need to calculate the molar mass of cis-2-butene and make sure that each quantity is expre ssed in
the appropriate units. Butene is C H, so its molar mass i s 56.11 g/mol. Thus
or approximately 810 mi/h.
Calculate the rms speed of a sample of radon gas at 23°C.
Answer
(about 410 mi/h)
The kinetic molecular theory of gases demonstrates how a successful theory can explain previously observe d empirical
relationships (laws) in an intuitively satisfying way. Un fortunately, the actual gases that we encounter are no t “ideal,” although
their behavior usually approximates that of an ideal ga s.
Summary
Graham’s law for effusion:
Diffusion is the gradual mixing of gases to form a sample of uni form composition even in the absence of mechanical agi tation.
In contrast, effusion is the escape of a gas from a container through a tiny o pening into an evacuated space. The rate of effusion
of a gas is inversely proportional to the square root of it s molar mass (Graham’s law), a relationship that closely approximates
the rate of diffusion. As a result, light gases tend to d iffuse and effuse much more rapidly than heavier gases. The mean free
path of a molecule is the average distance it travels between collisions.−8
Example
4 8
4 8
Exercise

3.1.12.6 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1699843.1.12: Molecular Effusion and Diffusion is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

3.1.13.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1699853.1.13: Real Gases - Deviations from Ideal Behavior
To recognize the differences between the behavior of an ideal gas and a real gas
To understand how molecular volumes and intermolecular a ttractions cause the properties of real gases to deviate f rom
those predicted by the ideal gas law.
The postulates of the kinetic molecular theory of g ases ignore both the volume occupied by the molecul es of a gas and all
interactions between molecules, whether attractive or repulsive. In reality, however, all gases have nonzero m olecular volumes.
Furthermore, the molecules of real gases interact with one another in ways that depend on the structure of the molecules and
therefore differ for each gaseous substance. In this sec tion, we consider the properties of real gases and ho w and why they differ
from the predictions of the ideal gas law. We also e xamine liquefaction, a key property of real gases t hat is not predicted by the
kinetic molecular theory of gases.
Pressure, Volume, and Temperature Relationships in Real Gases
For an ideal gas, a plot of versus gives a horizontal line with an intercept of 1 on the axis. Real gases,
however, show significant deviations from the behavior expected for an ideal gas, particularly at high pre ssures (Figure).
Only at relatively low pressures (less than 1 atm) do real ga ses approximate ideal gas behavior (Figure).
Figure: Real Gases Do Not Obey the Ideal Gas Law, Especi ally at High Pressures. (a) In these plots of PV/nRT versus P at
273 K for several common gases, there are large negati ve deviations observed for C H and CO because they liqu efy at relatively
low pressures. (b) These plots illustrate the relatively good agreement between experimental data for real g ases and the ideal gas
law at low pressures.
Real gases also approach ideal gas behavior more clos ely at higher temperatures, as shown in Figure for. W hy do real
gases behave so differently from ideal gases at high p ressures and low temperatures? Under these conditions, the two basic
assumptions behind the ideal gas law—namely, that gas molecules have negligible volume and that intermolec ular interactions are
negligible—are no longer valid.Learning Objectives
2 4 2

3.1.13.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169985
Figure: The Effect of Temperature on the Behavior of Real Gases. A plot of versus for nitrogen gas at thre e
temperatures shows that the approximation to ideal gas behavior becomes better as the temperature increases.
Because the molecules of an ideal gas are assumed t o have zero volume, the volume available to them for motion is always the
same as the volume of the container. In contrast, th e molecules of a real gas have small but measurable volumes. At low pressures,
the gaseous molecules are relatively far apart, but as the pressure of the gas increases, the intermole cular distances become smaller
and smaller (Figure). As a result, the volume occupie d by the molecules becomes significant compared with t he volume of
the container. Consequently, the total volume occupie d by the gas is greater than the volume predicted by the ideal gas law. Thus at
very high pressures, the experimentally measured value of PV/nRT is greater than the value predicted by the ideal gas la w.
Figure: The Effect of Nonzero V olume of Gas Particles on the Behavior of Gases at Low and High Pressures. (a) At low
pressures, the volume occupied by the molecules themselv es is small compared with the volume of the container. (b) At high
pressures, the molecules occupy a large portion of the volume of the container, resulting in significantly d ecreased space in which
the molecules can move.
Moreover, all molecules are attracted to one another by a combination of forces. These forces become par ticularly important for
gases at low temperatures and high pressures, where i ntermolecular distances are shorter. Attractions betwe en molecules reduce the
number of collisions with the container wall, an effec t that becomes more pronounced as the number of att ractive interactions
increases. Because the average distance between molec ules decreases, the pressure exerted by the gas on th e container wall
decreases, and the observed pressure is less than expected (Figure). Thus as shown in Figure, at l ow temperatures,
the ratio of is lower than predicted for an ideal g as, an effect that becomes particularly evident for co mplex gases and for
simple gases at low temperatures. At very high pressur es, the effect of nonzero molecular volume predominat es. The competition
between these effects is responsible for the minimum obser ved in the versus plot for many gases.
Nonzero molecular volume makes the actual volume greater than predicted at hi gh
pressures; intermolecular attractions make the pressure less than predicted.
At high temperatures, the molecules have sufficient k inetic energy to overcome intermolecular attractive forces, and the effects of
nonzero molecular volume predominate. Conversely, a s the temperature is lowered, the kinetic energy of t he gas molecules
decreases. Eventually, a point is reached where the m olecules can no longer overcome the intermolecular attractive forces, and the
gas liquefies (condenses to a liquid).
The van der Waals Equation
The Dutch physicist Johannes van der Waals (1837–1923; Nobel Prize in Physics, 1910) modified the ideal gas l aw to describe the
behavior of real gases by explicitly including the ef fects of molecular size and intermolecular forces. I n his description of gas

3.1.13.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169985behavior, the so-called van der Waals equation,
a and b are empirical constants that are different for eac h gas. The values of and are listed in Table for several common
gases.
Table:: van der Waals Constants for Some Common Gases (see Table A8 for more complete list)
Gas a ((L ·atm)/mol) b (L/mol)
He 0.03410 0.0238
Ne 0.205 0.0167
Ar 1.337 0.032
H 0.2420 0.0265
N 1.352 0.0387
O 1.364 0.0319
Cl 6.260 0.0542
NH 4.170 0.0371
CH 2.273 0.0430
CO 3.610 0.0429
The pressure term in Equation corrects for intermol ecular attractive forces that tend to reduce the pr essure from that
predicted by the ideal gas law. Here, represents the concentration of the gas () squared because it tak es two particles to
engage in the pairwise intermolecular interactions o f the type shown in Figure. The volume term corrects for the volume
occupied by the gaseous molecules.
Figure: The Effect of Intermolecular Attractive Force s on the Pressure a Gas Exerts on the Container Walls. (a) At low
pressures, there are relatively few attractive intermo lecular interactions to lessen the impact of the molec ule striking the wall of the
container, and the pressure is close to that predicted by the ideal gas law. (b) At high pressures, with the a verage intermolecular
distance relatively small, the effect of intermolecul ar interactions is to lessen the impact of a given mole cule striking the container
wall, resulting in a lower pressure than predicted by the ideal gas law.
The correction for volume is negative, but the corre ction for pressure is positive to reflect the effect of each factor on V and P,
respectively. Because nonzero molecular volumes produ ce a measured volume that is larger than that predicted by the ideal gas
law, we must subtract the molecular volumes to obtain the actual volume available. Conversely, attractive intermolecular forces
produce a pressure that is less than that expected based on the ideal gas law, so t he term must be added to the measured
pressure to correct for these effects.2 2

3.1.13.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169985You are in charge of the manufacture of cylinders o f compressed gas at a small company. Your company pre sident would like
to offer a 4.00 L cylinder containing 500 g of chlor ine in the new catalog. The cylinders you have on han d have a rupture
pressure of 40 atm. Use both the ideal gas law and th e van der Waals equation to calculate the pressure i n a cylinder at 25°C. Is
this cylinder likely to be safe against sudden rupture (which would be disastrous and certainly result in la wsuits because
chlorine gas is highly toxic)?
Given: volume of cylinder, mass of compound, pressure, and temper ature
Asked for: safety
Strategy:
A Use the molar mass of chlorine to calculate the amo unt of chlorine in the cylinder. Then calculate the pressure of the gas
using the ideal gas law.
B Obtain a and b values for Cl from Table. Use the van der Waals equa tion () to solve for the pressure of the
gas. Based on the value obtained, predict whether the cyli nder is likely to be safe against sudden rupture.
Solution:
A We begin by calculating the amount of chlorine in the cyli nder using the molar mass of chlorine (70.906 g/mol):

Using the ideal gas law and the temperature in kelvin (298 K), we calculate the pressure:
If chlorine behaves like an ideal gas, you have a real p roblem!
B Now let’s use the van der Waals equation with the a and b values for Cl from Table. Solving for gives
This pressure is well within the safety limits of the cyl inder. The ideal gas law predicts a pressure 15 atm hig her than that of the
van der Waals equation.
A 10.0 L cylinder contains 500 g of methane. Calculate it s pressure to two significant figures at 27°C using the
a. ideal gas law.
b. van der Waals equation.
Answer aExample
Exercise

3.1.13.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/16998577 atm
Answer b
67 atm
Liquefaction of Gases
Liquefaction of gases is the condensation of gases int o a liquid form, which is neither anticipated nor ex plained by the kinetic
molecular theory of gases. Both the theory and the i deal gas law predict that gases compressed to very hi gh pressures and cooled to
very low temperatures should still behave like gases, al beit cold, dense ones. As gases are compressed and cool ed, however, they
invariably condense to form liquids, although very lo w temperatures are needed to liquefy light elements s uch as helium (for He,
4.2 K at 1 atm pressure).
Liquefaction can be viewed as an extreme deviation fr om ideal gas behavior. It occurs when the molecules o f a gas are cooled to
the point where they no longer possess sufficient kine tic energy to overcome intermolecular attractive for ces. The precise
combination of temperature and pressure needed to li quefy a gas depends strongly on its molar mass and st ructure, with heavier
and more complex molecules usually liquefying at hig her temperatures. In general, substances with large va n der Waals
coefficients are relatively easy to liquefy because large a coefficients indicate relatively strong intermolec ular attractive
interactions. Conversely, small molecules with only lig ht elements have small a coefficients, indicating weak intermolecular
interactions, and they are relatively difficult to l iquefy. Gas liquefaction is used on a massive scale to separate O, N, Ar, Ne, Kr,
and Xe. After a sample of air is liquefied, the mixture is warm ed, and the gases are separated according to their boil ing points.
A large value of a in the van der Waals equation indicates the presence of r elatively strong
intermolecular attractive interactions.
The ultracold liquids formed from the liquefaction of gases are called cryogenic liquids, from the Greek kryo, meaning “cold,” and
genes, meaning “producing.” They have applications as re frigerants in both industry and biology. For example, u nder carefully
controlled conditions, the very cold temperatures a fforded by liquefied gases such as nitrogen (boilin g point = 77 K at 1 atm) can
preserve biological materials, such as semen for the a rtificial insemination of cows and other farm animals. These liquids can also
be used in a specialized type of surgery called cryosurgery, which selectively destroys tissues with a minimal los s of blood by the
use of extreme cold.
Figure: A Liquid Natural Gas Transport Ship.
Moreover, the liquefaction of gases is tremendously im portant in the storage and shipment of fossil fuels (Fi gure).
Liquefied natural gas (LNG) and liquefied petroleum g as (LPG) are liquefied forms of hydrocarbons produced f rom natural gas or
petroleum reserves. LNG consists mostly of methane, with sma ll amounts of heavier hydrocarbons; it is prepared b y cooling
natural gas to below about −162°C. It can be stored i n double-walled, vacuum-insulated containers at or slig htly above atmospheric
pressure. Because LNG occupies only about 1/600 the vo lume of natural gas, it is easier and more economic al to transport. LPG is
typically a mixture of propane, propene, butane, and butenes and is primarily used as a fuel for home hea ting. It is also used as a
feedstock for chemical plants and as an inexpensive and relatively nonpolluting fuel for some automobiles.2 2

3.1.13.6 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169985Summary
No real gas exhibits ideal gas behavior, although many real gases approximate it over a range of conditio ns. Deviations from ideal
gas behavior can be seen in plots of PV/nRT versus P at a given temperature; for an ideal gas, PV/nRT versus P = 1 under all
conditions. At high pressures, most real gases exhibit l arger PV/nRT values than predicted by the ideal gas law, whereas a t low
pressures, most real gases exhibit PV/nRT values close to those predicted by the ideal gas la w. Gases most closely approximate
ideal gas behavior at high temperatures and low press ures. Deviations from ideal gas law behavior can be d escribed by the van der
Waals equation, which includes empirical constants to correct for th e actual volume of the gaseous molecules and quantify the
reduction in pressure due to intermolecular attracti ve forces. If the temperature of a gas is decreased su fficiently, liquefaction
occurs, in which the gas condenses into a liquid form. Li quefied gases have many commercial applications, in cluding the transport
of large amounts of gases in small volumes and the uses of ultracold cryogenic liquids.
3.1.13: Real Gases - Deviations from Ideal Behavior is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
LibreTexts.

1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169988SECTION OVERVIEW
Topic D- Thermochemistry
WHAT YOU SHOULD BE ABLE TO DO WHEN YOU HA VE FINISHED THIS TOPIC:
1. Know the meaning of heat and work, and their relationship t o energy (the First Law of Thermodynamics).
2. Relate temperature changes and changes of state to t he corresponding amounts of heat, using specific heats, h eats of fusion,
and heats of vaporization.
3. Use standard calorimetric data (temperatures, masses, and specific heats) to calculate ΔE and ΔH for a reaction.
4. Interconvert ΔE and ΔH for a reaction, and calculate t he pressure-volume work that occurs under constant-press ure
conditions.
5. Calculate the heat produced by a reaction under const ant-pressure or constant-volume conditions, given the mas ses of
reactants and either ΔE or ΔH for the reaction.
6. Understand the meaning of enthalpy of formation (ΔH) an d use enthalpies of formation to calculate ΔH for a reacti on.
7. Use Hess’s Law to calculate ΔH for a reaction, given appropria te ΔH values for other reactions.
8. Understand the relationship between changes in chemic al potential energy and the energy of a reaction.
4.1: Thermochemistry
4.1.1: Energy, Heat and Work
4.1.2: Calorimetry
4.1.3: The First Law of Thermodynamics
4.1.4: Energy and Chemical Change
4.1.5: Enthalpy – A Modified Energy of Reaction
4.1.6: Putting it All Together
4.1.7: Tabulated Enthalpy Values
4.1.8: Hess's Law
Topic D- Thermochemistry is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.Learning Objectives
f

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
4.1: Thermochemistry
4.1: Thermochemistry is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.4.1.1: Energy, Heat and Work
4.1.2: Calorimetry
4.1.3: The First Law of Thermodynamics
4.1.4: Energy and Chemical Change
4.1.5: Enthalpy – A Modified Energy of Reaction
4.1.6: Putting it All Together
4.1.7: Tabulated Enthalpy Values
4.1.8: Hess's LawTopic hierarchy

4.1.1.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1699904.1.1: Energy, Heat and Work
Energy, Heat and Work
Energy is the ability to move an object against a res isting force. Moving an object against a resisting for ce is called work, so we
can write our energy definition more formally:
Energy is the ability to do work.
Work is a way to transfer energy from one collection of matter to another. Fo r example, if you lift a backpack, you transfer some of
your body’s energy to the backpack. You have less ene rgy after you lift the backpack (you can’t keep lift ing the backpack forever),
but the backpack has more energy after it is lifted.
Energy can be used to do work, but it can also do thin gs that do not involve motion and resistance. For exa mple, think about a
mixture of gasoline and oxygen. This mixture can do a great deal of work if we put it into an engine and then ignite it; that is what
happens in an automobile engine. However, we can also si mply ignite the mixture in an open beaker; no usefu l work is done in this
case, but the beaker and everything else nearby will b ecome very hot. In this case, the energy has been tran sferred in the form of
heat. We now have two ways to transfer energy: heat and work. He re are formal definitions of these two terms:
Work occurs when energy is used to move an object against a resi sting force.
Heat occurs when energy is used in any other way.
It’s worth pointing out that the words “work” and “hea t” have somewhat different meanings in science than they do in everyday
life. In everyday life, “work” can mean things like “ doing your homework,” but in science, work requires m otion. If you lift a
heavy box, you do work, but if you just hold the heav y box over your head, you don’t (even though you get tired!). Likewise, in
everyday life, when we speak of “heat” we usually mean thermal energy, the energy that a hot object possesses in greater quantity
than a cool object. In science, “heat” is the transfer of energy from a warmer object to a cooler on e. An object cannot contain heat,
but it can lose or gain energy in the form of heat.
Units of Energy
In order to measure energy, we need a unit for it. In the metric system, the standard unit of energy is the joule. The formal
definition of a joule is: A joule is the amount of energy expended when an obje ct is moved 1 meter against a resisting force of 1
newton. (You can learn all about the concept of force in a physics class.) As for the joule, here are some statement s that may help
you visualize this unit. A joule is…
…enough energy to lift a one kilogram object 10.2 centi meters.
…enough energy to heat one milliliter of water from 20ºC t o 20.24ºC.
…enough energy to keep a 60 watt light bulb glowing for 0. 0167 seconds.
Obviously, a joule is a very small amount of energy, and in fact it is an inconveniently small amount when we describe chemical
reactions. Chemists usually report energies for reactions in kilojoules (1 kJ = 1000 J).
Sign Conventions for Heat and Work
Heat and work have signs (positive or negative), and t he sign of each depends on whether the system we are co nsidering is gaining
or losing energy. In this class, if a process makes the system gain energy, and/or are positive; if the process makes the system
lose energy, and/or are negative. We can put this inform ation into four formal statements:
If heat flows into a system, is positive.
If heat flows out of a system, is negative
If the surroundings do work on the system, is positive.
If the system does work, is negative.

4.1.1.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169990Note that chemists use these conventions so the signs of and correspond the the energy changes of the system. If you were
instead focused on the energy transferred in or out of the surroundings, you might opt to use the opposite sign conventions. Indeed,
many physics and engineering courses choose different si gn conventions!
Heat in Physical Processes
When we add energy to an object in the form of heat, the m ost common results are:
a) The temperature of the object goes up.
b) The object melts (if it is a solid) or boils (if it is a li quid).
Heat and Change in Temperature
When the temperature of an object changes, the relationsh ip between the temperature change and the heat that the ob ject gained or
lost is:
Here, stands for heat (in joules), m is the mass of t he object that changes temperature (in grams), is the specific heat capacity
(or just “specific heat”) of the object, and is the temperature change (in ºC). The specific heat capacit y is essentially a
conversion factor that relates energy to temperature changes and masses. Every substance has its own specific heat capacity, which
depends on the chemical composition of the substance, the state of the substance, and (to some extent) the temperature of the
substance. Here are specific heat capacities for the three states of water and for a few other common substances.
Table: Specific Heat Capacities
SubstanceSpecific Heat Capacity
() SubstanceSpecific Heat Capacity
Water at 25ºC 4.180 J/g·ºC Helium (He) at 25ºC 5.193 J/g ·ºC
Water at 0ºC 4.218 J/g·ºC Alcohol (C H OH) at
25ºC2.419 J/g·ºC
Ice at 0ºC 2.050 J/g·ºC Salt (NaCl) at 25ºC 0.864 J/g·ºC
Steam at 100ºC 2.042 J/g·ºC Gold (Au) at 25ºC 0.129 J/g·ºC
Note that the specific heat capacity of water doesn’t change very much over the range 0ºC to 25ºC, but it ch anges a great deal when
we convert the water into ice or steam. Note also that we see a wide range of specific heats when we look at a variety of chemicals;
the specific heat of helium is about 40 times as large as that of gold.
How much energy is required to increase the temperature o f a 15.0 g sample of gold from to?
Solution
Heat and Change in Physical State
So far, we have discussed heat transfers that cause temp erature change. However, in a phase transition, heat tran sfer does not cause
any temperature change.2 5
Exercise: Calculating Energy Required for a Temperature Change

4.1.1.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169990For an example of phase changes, consider the additi on of heat to a sample of ice at (Figure) and atmo spheric
pressure. The temperature of the ice rises linearly, absorbing heat at a constant rate of until it reache s. Once at this temperature,
the ice begins to melt and continues until it has al l melted, absorbing 333 J/g of heat. The temperature r emains constant at
during this phase change. Once all the ice has melted, the temperature of the liquid water rises, absorbing h eat at a new constant
rate. At the water begins to boil. The temperature ag ain remains constant during this phase change while th e water absorbs
2256 kJ/kg of heat and turns into steam. When all the liquid has become steam, the temperature rises agai n, absorbing heat at a
constant rate. If we started with steam and cooled it to make it condense into liquid water and freeze int o ice, the process would
exactly reverse, with the temperature again constant du ring each phase transition.
Figure: Temperature versus heat. The system is constructed so that no vap or evaporates while ice warms to become liquid
water, and so that, when vaporization occurs, the vapor rema ins in the system. The long stretches of constant temperatures at
and reflect the large amounts of heat needed to cause melt ing and vaporization, respectively.
Where does the heat added during melting or boiling go, considering that the temperature does not change until the transition is
complete? Energy is required to melt a solid, because the attractive forces between the molecules in the solid must be broken apart,
so that in the liquid, the molecules can move aroun d at comparable kinetic energies; thus, there is no rise in temperature. Energy is
needed to vaporize a liquid for similar reasons. Con versely, work is done by attractive forces when molecule s are brought together
during freezing and condensation. That energy must be transferred out of the system, usually in the form o f heat, to allow the
molecules to stay together (Figure). Thus, condensat ion occurs in association with cold objects—the glass in Figure,
for example.

4.1.1.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169990Figure: Condensation forms on this glass of iced tea because the te mperature of the nearby air is reduced. The air cannot
hold as much water as it did at room temperature, so water c ondenses. Energy is released when the water condenses, sp eeding the
melting of the ice in the glass. (credit: Jenny Downing)
The energy released when a liquid freezes is used by orange growers when the temperature approaches. Growe rs spray water
on the trees so that the water freezes and heat is re leased to the growing oranges. This prevents the temp erature inside the orange
from dropping below freezing, which would damage the fruit (Fi gure).
Figure: The ice on these trees released large amounts of energy when i t froze, helping to prevent the temperature of the trees
from dropping below. Water is intentionally sprayed on orc hards to help prevent hard frosts. (credit: Hermann Hammer)
The energy per unit mass required to change a substa nce from the solid phase to the liquid phase, or relea sed when the substance
changes from liquid to solid, is known as the heat of fusion,. The energy per unit mass required to change a subs tance from
the liquid phase to the vapor phase is known as the heat of vaporization. The strength of the forces depends on the nature of
constituent particles of the substance. The heat req uired in a phase change in a sample of mass m is given by
where these "heats of transition," and are constants tha t are determined experimentally. Note that these hea ts of
transformation are also sometimes called "latent hea ts". These constants are “latent,” or hidden, because du ring the phase changes,
energy enters or leaves a system without causing a temper ature change (!) in the system, so in effect, the energy i s hidden.
Figure: (a) Energy is required to partially overcome the attrac tive forces (modeled as springs) between particles in a s olid
to form a liquid. That same energy must be removed from the liquid for freezing to take place. (b) Particles become separate d by
large distances when going from liquid to vapor, requiring significant energy to completely overcome molecular attracti on. The
same energy must be removed from the vapor for condensation t o take place.

4.1.1.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169990Table lists representative values of heats of phase tr ansformation, together with melting and boiling point s. Note that in
general,. The table shows that the amounts of energy involved in phase changes can easily be comparable to or greater than
those involved in temperature changes, as Figure and the accompanying discussion also showed.
Table: Heats of Fusion and Vaporization
Substance Melting Point (), (Boiling Point () (
Mercury –38.9 11.8 357 272
Water 0.00 334 100.0 2256
Sulfur 119 38.1 444.6 326
Lead 327 24.5 1750 871
Antimony 631 165 1440 561
Aluminum 660 380 2450 11400
Silver 961 88.3 2193 2336
Gold 1063 64.5 2660 1578
Copper 1083 134 2595 5069
Values quoted at the normal melting and boiling temp eratures at standard atmospheric pressure (). Helium has no solid phase at
atmospheric pressure. The melting point given is at a p ressure of 2.5 MPa. At (body temperature), the heat o f vaporization for
water is 2430 J/g.
Phase changes can have a strong stabilizing effect on temperatures that are not near the melting and boili ng points, since
evaporation and condensation occur even at temperatu res below the boiling point. For example, air temperatur es in humid climates
rarely go above approximately because most heat tra nsfer goes into evaporating water into the air. Simil arly, temperatures in
humid weather rarely fall below the dew point—the temp erature where condensation occurs given the concentr ation of water vapor
in the air—because so much heat is released when water vapor condenses.
More energy is required to evaporate water below the b oiling point than at the boiling point, because the k inetic energy of water
molecules at temperatures below is less than that at, so less energy is available from random thermal m otions. For
example, at body temperature, evaporation of sweat fr om the skin requires a heat input of 2428 J/g, which is about 10% higher than
the latent heat of vaporization at. This heat comes from the skin, and this evaporative cooling effect of sweating helps reduce
the body temperature in hot weather. However, high hum idity inhibits evaporation, so that body temperature might rise, while
unevaporated sweat might be left on your brow.
Note that heats of transformation can be expressed e ither in joules per gram or in joules per mole. For wa ter, the heat of fusion is
3343.54 J/g. Since a mole of water equals 18.0 16 grams, the heat of fusion can also be expressed as 333.54 J/g x 18.0 16 g/mol =
60091 J/mol, or 6.009 kJ/mol.
How much energy is required to melt 35.0 g of ice at 0ºC?
Solution
Like solid-liquid and and liquid-vapor transitions, direct solid-vapor transitions or sublimations involve heat. The energy
transferred is given by the equation \(q = m\Delta H_{ sub}\), where \(\Delta H_{sub}\) is the heat of sublimation, analogous to \[3]
[2]
[3]
Exercise: Calculating Energy Required for a Phase Change

4.1.1.6 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169990(\Delta H_{fus}\) and \(\Delta H_{vap}\). The heat of su blimation at a given temperature is equal to the he at of fusion plus the heat
of vaporization at that temperature.
We can now calculate any number of effects related t o temperature and phase change. In each case, it is n ecessary to identify which
temperature and phase changes are taking place. Keep in mind that heat transfer can cause both temperatu re and phase changes.
Here is an example where we are changing both the temperatur e and the physical state.

Question:
How much heat is required to convert 50.0 g of ice at -10.0ºC i nto liquid water at 10.0ºC?
Solution:
We must put in enough heat to do three things: rais e the temperature of the ice from -10.0ºC to 0ºC, melt the ice, and then raise
the temperature of the resulting water from 0ºC to 10.0ºC:

Warming the ice: q = (50.0 g)(2.05 J/g·ºC)[0ºC – (-10.0ºC)] = 1 025 J = 1.025 kJ
Melting the ice: q = (50.0 g)(333.5 J/g) = 16675 J = 16.675 kJ
Warming the liquid water: q = (50.0 g)(4.18 J/g·ºC)(10.0ºC – 0 ºC) = 2090 J = 2.09 kJ

Total heat required: q = q + q + q = 1.025 kJ + 16.675 kJ + 2.0 9 kJ = 19.8 kJ
From the above calculation, we see that a total of 19.8 kJ is required to convert 50.0 g of ice at -10.0ºC into liquid water at
10.0ºC

Question:
Three ice cubes are used to chill a soda at with mas s. The ice is at and each ice cube has a mass of 6.0 g.
Assume that the soda is kept in a foam container so th at heat loss can be ignored and that the soda has the same specific heat as
water. Find the final temperature when all ice has melted.
Strategy:
The ice cubes are at the melting temperature of. He at is transferred from the soda to the ice for meltin g. Melting yields
water at, so more heat is transferred from the soda to this water until the water plus soda system reaches t hermal
equilibrium. So, in order to solve this problem, we must co nsider three heat values:
1) Melting the ice at:
2) Warming the melted ice to the final equilibrium tem perature:
3) Cooling the soda to the final equilibrium temperatu re:
Since no heat is lost, only transferred:Exercise: Heat Transfer Involving Both Temperature and Phase Change
total 1 2 3
Exercise: Calculating Final Temperature from Phase Change

4.1.1.7 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169990so that
Solve for the unknown quantity
Solution
First we identify the known quantities. The mass of ice i s and the mass of soda is. Then we
calculate the final temperature:
Significance This example illustrates the large energi es involved during a phase change. The mass of ice i s about 7% of the
mass of the soda but leads to a noticeable change in the temperature of the soda. Although we assumed that the ice was at the
freezing temperature, this is unrealistic for ice stra ight out of a freezer: The typical temperature is. However, this
correction makes no significant change from the result we found. Can you explain why?

1. Examine the situation to determine that there is a change in the temperature or phase. Is there heat transfer i nto or out of the
system? When it is not obvious whether a phase change occu rs or not, you may wish to first solve the problem as if ther e
were no phase changes, and examine the temperature chang e obtained. If it is sufficient to take you past a boilin g or
melting point, you should then go back and do the proble m in steps—temperature change, phase change, subsequent
temperature change, and so on.
2. Identify and list all objects that change temperature o r phase.
3. Identify exactly what needs to be determined in the probl em (identify the unknowns). A written list is useful.
4. Make a list of what is given or what can be inferred from t he problem as stated (identify the knowns). If there is a
temperature change, the transferred heat depends on the specific heat of the substance, and if there is a phase ch ange, the
transferred heat depends on the heat of transformation o f the substance.
5. Solve the appropriate equation for the quantity to be de termined (the unknown).
6. Substitute the knowns along with their units into the appro priate equation and obtain numerical solutions complete wit h
units. You may need to do this in steps if there is more than o ne state to the process, such as a temperature change fol lowed
by a phase change. However, in a calorimetry problem, each step corresponds to a term in the single equation
. Note that Exercise 4 is an example of such an equation.
7. Check the answer to see if it is reasonable. Does it make sense? As an example, be certain that any temperature change doe s
not also cause a phase change that you have not taken into account.
Why does snow often remain even when daytime temperatur es are higher than the freezing temperature?
Snow is formed from ice crystals and thus is the solid phase of water. Because enormous heat is necessary for phase changes, it
takes a certain amount of time for this heat to be tran sferred from the air, even if the air is above

Practice Problems Involving Heat
1) The specific heat of ethanol (C H OH) is 2.45 J/g·ºC, and its density is 0.789 g/mL. Using this information, ans wer the
following questions:
a) How much heat is required to raise the temperature of 50.0 m L of ethanol from –5.0ºC to 25.0ºC?Problem-Solving Strategy: The Effects of Heat Transfer
Exercise
2 5

4.1.1.8 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169990b) If 525 J of heat is added to 25.0 g of ethanol, an d the initial temperature of the ethanol is 10.0ºC, wha t will the final temperature
be?
c) A 50.0 g sample of water is placed beside a sampl e of ethanol whose mass is unknown. The two samples then absorb equal
amounts of heat. The temperature of the water increa ses from 20.0ºC to 28.7ºC, while the temperature of the ethanol increases from
20.0ºC to 31.3ºC. Calculate the mass of the ethanol.
2) Jerry puts a 71.325 g piece of aluminum into a b eaker and adds 123.4 g water. How much heat will be requi red to raise the
temperature of the water and the aluminum from 18.4ºC to 31. 6ºC? You will need the following information:
Al: specific heat = 0.897 J/g·ºC in this temperature range
H O: specific heat = 4.177 J/g·ºC in this temperature range
3) A chemist heats 31.5 g of NaCl crystals to 76.5ºC, a nd then pours the crystals into 61.2 g of CCl. The initial temperature of the
CCl is 12.8ºC, and the final temperature is 36.5ºC. The specific heat of CCl (carbon tetrachloride) is 0.751 J/g·ºC. Assuming that
no energy is lost to the surroundings, calculate the sp ecific heat of NaCl.
4) You put 12.0 g of ice at 0.0ºC into a coffee-cup ca lorimeter containing 50.0 g of water at 25.0ºC. Assuming that all the ice melts,
determine the final temperature of the cup contents. You ’ll need the following information for water:
melting point: 0.0 ºC specific heat capacity: 4.18 J/gºC he at of fusion: 333 J/g

5) A chunk of iron at 300.0ºC is added to an insulate d container holding 100.0 g of water at 25.0 ºC. What i s the minimum mass of
iron required to convert all the water into steam at 100.0 ºC?
You’ll need the following information:
Water -- boiling point: 100.0 ºC specific heat capacity: 4.18 J/gºC heat of vaporization: 2260 J/g
Iron – specific heat capacity: 0.448 J/gºC
--------------------------------------------------- --------------------------AnswerS to the Practice Problems Involving Heat
1) a) 2.90 kJ b) 18.6 °C c) 65.7 g
2) 7.65 x 10 J
3) 0.865 J/g°C
4) 4.7 °C
5) 2870 g
4.1.1: Energy, Heat and Work is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.2
4 4

4.1.2.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1699914.1.2: Calorimetry
Explain the technique of calorimetry
Calculate and interpret heat and related properties usi ng typical calorimetry data
A calorimeter is a device used to measure the amount of heat involved in a chemical or physical process. For example, when an exothermic
reaction occurs in solution in a calorimeter, the h eat produced by the reaction is absorbed by the sol ution, which increases its temperature. When
an endothermic reaction occurs, the heat required is absorbed from the thermal energy of the solution, whi ch decreases its temperature (Figure
). The temperature change, along with the specific heat and mass of the solution, can then be used to calcu late the amount of heat involved
in either case.
Figure: In a calorimetric determination, either (a) an exothermic process occurs and heat, q, is negative, indicating that thermal energy is
transferred from the system to its surroundings, or (b) a n endothermic process occurs and heat, q, is positive, i ndicating that thermal energy is
transferred from the surroundings to the system.
By convention, q is given a negative (-) sign when th e system releases heat to the surroundings (exotherm ic); q is given a positive (+) sign
when the system absorbs heat from the surroundings (endot hermic).
Scientists use well-insulated calorimeters that all but prevent the transfer of heat between the calorimeter and its environment. This enables the
accurate determination of the heat involved in chemic al processes, the energy content of foods, and so on. General chemistry students often use
simple calorimeters constructed from polystyrene cup s (Figure). These easy-to-use “coffee cup” calorimete rs allow more heat exchange
with their surroundings, and therefore produce less accurat e energy values.
Figure: A simple calorimeter can be constructed from two polystyrene cups. A thermometer and stirrer extend through the cover into the
reaction mixture.
Commercial solution calorimeters are also available. Relatively inexpensive calorimeters often consist o f two thin-walled cups that are nested in a
way that minimizes thermal contact during use, along with an insulated cover, handheld stirrer, and simple thermometer. More expensiveLearning Objectives

4.1.2.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169991calorimeters used for industry and research typicall y have a well-insulated, fully enclosed reaction ves sel, motorized stirring mechanism, and a
more accurate temperature sensor (Figure).
Figure: Commercial solution calorimeters range from (a) simple, inexpensive models for student use to (b) exp ensive, more accurate
models for industry and research.
Before we practice calorimetry problems involving chemic al reactions, consider a simple example that illustr ates the core idea behind
calorimetry. Suppose we initially have a high-temperatu re substance, such as a hot piece of metal (M), and a low-temperature substance, such as
cool water (W). If we place the metal in the water, heat will flow from M to W. The temperature of M will decrease, an d the temperature of W
will increase, until the two substances have the same temperature—that is, when they reach thermal equilib rium (Figure). If this occurs in
a calorimeter, ideally all of this heat transfer oc curs between the two substances, with no heat gained o r lost by either the calorimeter or the
calorimeter’s surroundings. Under these ideal circums tances, the net heat change is zero:
This relationship is sometimes rearranged to more expli citly show that the heat gained by substance M is equal to the heat lost by substance W:
The magnitude of the heat (change) is the same for bot h substances, and the negative sign merely shows that q M and q W are
opposite in direction of heat flow (gain or loss) but d oes not indicate the arithmetic sign of either q value (that is determined by whether the
matter in question gains or loses heat, per definition). In the specific situation described, q M is a negative value and q W is
positive, since heat is transferred from M to W.
Figure: In a simple calorimetry process, (a) heat, q, is transferred from the hot metal, M, to the cool wat er, W, until (b) both are at the same
temperature.substance substance
substance substance

4.1.2.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169991A hot 360-g piece of rebar (a steel rod used for reinfor cing concrete) is dropped into 425 mL of water at 24.0 °C. The final temperature of the
water is measured as 42.7 °C. Calculate the initial t emperature of the piece of rebar. Assume the specific he at of steel is approximately the
same as that for iron (Table T4), and that all heat transfer occurs between the rebar and the water (there is no heat exchange with the
surroundings).
Solution
The temperature of the water increases from 24.0 °C to 42.7 °C, so the water absorbs heat. That heat came f rom the piece of rebar, which
initially was at a higher temperature. Assuming that a ll heat transfer was between the rebar and the water, with no heat “lost” to the
surroundings, then heat given off by rebar = − heat taken i n by water, or:
Since we know how heat is related to other measurable quan tities, we have:
Letting f = final and i = initial, in expanded form, thi s becomes:
The density of water is 1.0 g/mL, so 425 mL of water = 4 25 g. Noting that the final temperature of both the rebar and water is 42.7 °C,
substituting known values yields:
Solving this gives Ti,rebar= 248 °C, so the initial tempera ture of the rebar was 248 °C.
A 248-g piece of copper is dropped into 390 mL of wate r at 22.6 °C. The final temperature of the water was mea sured as 39.9 °C. Calculate
the initial temperature of the piece of copper. Assume that all heat transfer occurs between the copper and the wat er.
Answer
The initial temperature of the copper was 335.6 °C.
A 248-g piece of copper initially at 314 °C is drop ped into 390 mL of water initially at 22.6 °C. Assumin g that all heat transfer occurs
between the copper and the water, calculate the final temp erature.
Answer
The final temperature (reached by both copper and water) is 38.7 °C.
This method can also be used to determine other quantit ies, such as the specific heat of an unknown metal.
A 59.7 g piece of metal that had been submerged in boiling water was quickly transferred into 60.0 mL of wa ter initially at 22.0 °C. The final
temperature is 28.5 °C. Use these data to determine the sp ecific heat of the metal. Use this result to identify t he metal.
Solution
Assuming perfect heat transfer, heat given off by metal wi ll be absorbed by the water, or:
In expanded form, this is:
Noting that since the metal was submerged in boiling water, its initial temperature was 100.0 °C; and that fo r water, 60.0 mL = 60.0 g; we
have:Example: Heat Transfer between Substances at Different Temperatures
Exercise
Exercise
Example: Identifying a Metal by Measuring Specific Heat

4.1.2.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169991Solving this:
Comparing this with values in Table T4, our experiment al specific heat is closest to the value for copper (0.39 J/g °C), so we identify the
metal as copper.
A 92.9-g piece of a silver/gray metal is heated to 1 78.0 °C, and then quickly transferred into 75.0 mL of water initially at 24.0 °C. After 5
minutes, both the metal and the water have reached t he same temperature: 29.7 °C. Determine the specific he at and the identity of the metal.
(Note: You should find that the specific heat is clos e to that of two different metals. Explain how you ca n confidently determine the identity
of the metal).
Answer
This specific heat is close to that of either gold o r lead. It would be difficult to determine which metal this was based solely on the
numerical values. However, the observation that the met al is silver/gray in addition to the value for the s pecific heat indicates that the
metal is lead.
When we use calorimetry to determine the heat involve d in an aqueous chemical reaction, the same principle s we have been discussing apply.
The amount of heat absorbed by the calorimeter is o ften small enough that we can neglect it (though not fo r highly accurate measurements, as
discussed later), and the calorimeter minimizes ener gy exchange with the surroundings. Because energy is neither created nor destroyed during a
chemical reaction, there is no overall energy change during the reaction. The heat produced or consumed i n the reaction (the “system”), q,
plus the heat absorbed or lost by the solution (the “sur roundings”), q, must add up to zero:
The amount of heat produced or consumed in the reacti on equals the amount of heat absorbed or lost by the solution. This concept lies at the heart
of all calorimetry problems and calculations.
When 50.0 mL of 0.10 M HCl(aq) and 50.0 mL of 1.00 M NaOH(aq), both at 22.0 °C, are added to a coffee cup calorim eter, the temperature
of the mixture reaches a maximum of 28.9 °C. What is th e approximate amount of heat produced by this reaction?
Solution
To visualize what is going on, imagine that you coul d combine the two solutions so quickly that no react ion took place while they mixed;
then after mixing, the reaction took place. At the ins tant of mixing, you have 100.0 mL of a mixture of HCl an d NaOH at 22.0 °C. The HCl
and NaOH then react until the solution temperature reaches 28.9 °C.
The heat given off by the reaction is equal to that taken in by the solution. Therefore:
(It is important to remember that this relationship only holds if the calorimeter does not absorb any hea t from the reaction, and there is no
heat exchange between the calorimeter and its surroundin gs.)
Next, we know that the heat absorbed by the solution depe nds on its specific heat, mass, and temperature change:
To proceed with this calculation, we need to make a f ew more reasonable assumptions or approximations. Since the solution is aqueous, we
can proceed as if it were water in terms of its speci fic heat and mass values. The density of water is appro ximately 1.0 g/mL, so 100.0 mL has
a mass of about 1.0 × 10 g (two significant figures). The specific heat of water is approximately 4.18 J/ g °C, so we use that for the specific
heat of the solution. Substituting these values gives:
Finally, since we are trying to find the heat of the reaction, we have:Exercise
reaction
solution
Example: Heat Produced by an Exothermic Reaction

4.1.2.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169991The negative sign indicates that the reaction is exothe rmic. It produces 2.89 kJ of heat.
When 100 mL of 0.200 M NaCl(aq) and 100 mL of 0.200 M AgNO (aq), both at 21.9 °C, are mixed in a coffee cup calori meter, the
temperature increases to 23.5 °C as solid AgCl forms. How much heat is produced by this precipitation reac tion? What assumptions did you
make to determine your value?
Answer
; assume no heat is absorbed by the calorimeter, no h eat is exchanged between the calorimeter and its sur roundings, and that
the specific heat and mass of the solution are the same as those for water
When working or playing outdoors on a cold day, you m ight use a hand warmer to warm your hands (Figure). A commo n reusable
hand warmer contains a supersaturated solution of NaC H O (sodium acetate) and a metal disc. Bending the di sk creates nucleation sites
around which the metastable NaC H O quickly crystallizes (a later chapter on solutions will investigate satura tion and supersaturation in
more detail).
The process is exothermic, and the heat produced by this process is absorbed by your hands, thereby
warming them (at least for a while). If the hand warmer is re heated, the NaC H O redissolves and can be reused.
Figure: Chemical hand warmers produce heat that warm s your hand on a cold day. In this one, you can see th e metal disc that initiates
the exothermic precipitation reaction. (credit: mod ification of work by Science Buddies TV/YouTube)
Another common hand warmer produces heat when it is ripp ed open, exposing iron and water in the hand warmer to oxygen in the air. One
simplified version of this exothermic reaction is
Salt in the hand warmer catalyzes the reaction, so it produces heat more rapidly; cellulose, vermiculite, an d activated carbon help distribute
the heat evenly. Other types of hand warmers use lighte r fluid (a platinum catalyst helps lighter fluid oxi dize exothermically), charcoal
(charcoal oxidizes in a special case), or electrical units that produce heat by passing an electrical curr ent from a battery through resistive
wires.
When solid ammonium nitrate dissolves in water, the s olution becomes cold. This is the basis for an “inst ant ice pack” (Figure). When
3.21 g of solid NH NO dissolves in 50.0 g of water at 24.9 °C in a calorimeter, the temperature decreases to 20.3 °C.
Calculate the value of q for this reaction and explain the meaning of its arithmet ic sign. State any assumptions that you made.Exercise
Thermochemistry of Hand Warmers
2 3 2
2 3 2
2 3 2
Example: Heat Flow in an Instant Ice Pack
4 3

4.1.2.6 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169991
Figure: An instant cold pack consists of a bag containi ng solid ammonium nitrate and a second bag of water. When the bag of water is
broken, the pack becomes cold because the dissolution o f ammonium nitrate is an endothermic process that remo ves thermal energy from the
water. The cold pack then removes thermal energy fro m your body.
Solution
We assume that the calorimeter prevents heat transfe r between the solution and its external environment (including the calorimeter itself), in
which case:
with “rxn” and “soln” used as shorthand for “reaction” and “s olution,” respectively.
Assuming also that the specific heat of the solution is the same as that for water, we have:
The positive sign for q indicates that the dissolution is an endothermic process.
When a 3.00-g sample of KCl was added to 3.00 × 10 g of water in a coffee cup calorimeter, the temperature de creased by 1.05 °C. How
much heat is involved in the dissolution of the KCl? W hat assumptions did you make?
Answer
1.33 kJ; assume that the calorimeter prevents heat t ransfer between the solution and its external environm ent (including the calorimeter
itself) and that the specific heat of the solution is the same as that for water.
If the amount of heat absorbed by a calorimeter is t oo large to neglect or if we require more accurate resu lts, then we must take into account the
heat absorbed both by the solution and by the calorime ter.
Figure: (a) A bomb calorimeter is used to measure heat produced by reactions involving gaseous reactants or p roducts, such as combustion.
(b) The reactants are contained in the gas-tight “bom b,” which is submerged in water and surrounded by insul ating materials. (credit a:
modification of work by “Harbor1”/Wikimedia commons)
The calorimeters described are designed to operate at constant (atmospheric) pressure and are convenient t o measure heat flow accompanying
processes that occur in solution. A different type of calorimeter that operates at constant volume, colloq uially known as a bomb calorimeter, isExercise

4.1.2.7 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169991used to measure the energy produced by reactions tha t yield large amounts of heat and gaseous products, such as combustion reactions. (The term
“bomb” comes from the observation that these reaction s can be vigorous enough to resemble explosions tha t would damage other calorimeters.)
This type of calorimeter consists of a robust steel container (the “bomb”) that contains the reactants and is itself submerged in water (Figure
). The sample is placed in the bomb, which is then fill ed with oxygen at high pressure. A small electrical s park is used to ignite the sample.
The energy produced by the reaction is trapped in the steel bomb and the surrounding water. The temperatur e increase is measured and, along
with the known heat capacity of the calorimeter, is us ed to calculate the energy produced by the reaction. Bomb calorimeters require calibration
to determine the heat capacity of the calorimeter and ensure accurate results. The calibration is accompli shed using a reaction with a known q,
such as a measured quantity of benzoic acid ignited by a spark from a nickel fuse wire that is weighed bef ore and after the reaction. The
temperature change produced by the known reaction is used to determine the heat capacity of the calorimet er. The calibration is generally
performed each time before the calorimeter is used to gat her research data.
Video: Video of view how a bomb calorimeter is prepared for action.
When 3.12 g of glucose, C H O, is burned in a bomb cal orimeter, the temperature of the calorimeter increases from 23.8 °C to 35.6 °C.
The calorimeter contains 775 g of water, and the bomb i tself has a heat capacity of 893 J/°C. How much heat wa s produced by the
combustion of the glucose sample?
Solution
The combustion produces heat that is primarily abso rbed by the water and the bomb. (The amounts of heat ab sorbed by the reaction products
and the unreacted excess oxygen are relatively smal l and dealing with them is beyond the scope of this text. We will neglect them in our
calculations.)
The heat produced by the reaction is absorbed by the water an d the bomb:
This reaction released 48.7 kJ of heat when 3.12 g of gluc ose was burned.
When 0.963 g of benzene, C H, is burned in a bomb calo rimeter, the temperature of the calorimeter increases by 8.39 °C. The bomb has a
heat capacity of 784 J/°C and is submerged in 925 mL o f water. How much heat was produced by the combustion of the gluco se sample?

Answer
Phy sical Chemistry iBook - Bomb CalorimetryPhy sical Chemistry iBook - Bomb Calorimetry
Example: Bomb Calorimetry
6 12 6
Exercise
6 6

4.1.2.8 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/16999139.0 kJ
Since the first one was constructed in 1899, 35 calorim eters have been built to measure the heat produced by a living person. These whole-body
calorimeters of various designs are large enough to hold an individual human being. More recently, whole- room calorimeters allow for relatively
normal activities to be performed, and these calorim eters generate data that more closely reflect the real world. These calorimeters are used to
measure the metabolism of individuals under different environmental conditions, different dietary regimes, and with different health conditions,
such as diabetes. In humans, metabolism is typically measured in Calories per day. A nutritional calori e (Calorie) is the energy unit used to
quantify the amount of energy derived from the metab olism of foods; one Calorie is equal to 1000 calorie s (1 kcal), the amount of energy needed
to heat 1 kg of water by 1 °C.
In your day-to-day life, you may be more familiar with energy being given in Calories, or nutritional calor ies, which are used to quantify the
amount of energy in foods. One calorie (cal) = exactly 4.184 joules, and one Calorie (note the capitalizat ion) = 1000 cal, or 1 kcal. (This is
approximately the amount of energy needed to heat 1 kg of water by 1 °C.)
The macronutrients in food are proteins, carbohydrate s, and fats or oils. Proteins provide about 4 Calories per gram, carbohydrates also
provide about 4 Calories per gram, and fats and oils pro vide about 9 Calories/g. Nutritional labels on food p ackages show the caloric content
of one serving of the food, as well as the breakdown into Calories from each of the three macronutrients (Figure).
Figure: (a) Macaroni and cheese contain energy in th e form of the macronutrients in the food. (b) The fo od’s nutritional information is
shown on the package label. In the US, the energy co ntent is given in Calories (per serving); the rest of t he world usually uses kilojoules.
(credit a: modification of work by “Rex Roof”/Flick r)
For the example shown in (b), the total energy per 228-g por tion is calculated by:
So, you can use food labels to count your Calories. But where do the values come from? And how accurate are th ey? The caloric content of
foods can be determined by using bomb calorimetry; that is, by burning the food and measuring the energ y it contains. A sample of food is
weighed, mixed in a blender, freeze-dried, ground into powder, and formed into a pellet. The pellet is burne d inside a bomb calorimeter, and
the measured temperature change is converted into ener gy per gram of food.
Today, the caloric content on food labels is derive d using a method called the Atwater system that uses the average caloric content of the
different chemical constituents of food, protein, carb ohydrate, and fats. The average amounts are those gi ven in the equation and are derived
from the various results given by bomb calorimetry o f whole foods. The carbohydrate amount is discounted a certain amount for the fiber
content, which is indigestible carbohydrate. To deter mine the energy content of a food, the quantities of carbohydrate, protein, and fat are
each multiplied by the average Calories per gram for each and the products summed to obtain the total energy.
Summary
Calorimetry is used to measure the amount of thermal energy transferred in a chemical or physical process. This requires careful measurement of
the temperature change that occurs during the proces s and the masses of the system and surroundings. The se measured quantities are then used to
compute the amount of heat produced or consumed in t he process using known mathematical relations. Calori meters are designed to minimize
energy exchange between the system being studied and its surroundings. They range from simple coffee cup calorimeters used by introductory
chemistry students to sophisticated bomb calorimeters used to determine the energy content of food.1
Measuring Nutritional Calories

4.1.2.9 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169991Footnotes
1. 1 Francis D. Reardon et al. “The Snellen human calorimeter re visited, re-engineered and upgraded: Design and performa nce characteristics.”
Medical and Biological Engineering and Computing 8 (2006)721–28, http://link.springer.com/article/10....517-006-0086-5.
Glossary
bomb calorimeter
device designed to measure the energy change for proce sses occurring under conditions of constant volume; comm only used for reactions
involving solid and gaseous reactants or products
calorimeter
device used to measure the amount of heat absorbed o r released in a chemical or physical process
calorimetry
process of measuring the amount of heat involved in a ch emical or physical process
nutritional calorie (Calorie)
unit used for quantifying energy provided by digestion of foods, defined as 1000 cal or 1 kcal
surroundings
all matter other than the system being studied
system
portion of matter undergoing a chemical or physical cha nge being studied
Contributors and Attributions
Paul Flowers (University of North Carolina - Pembroke), Klaus T heopold (University of Delaware) and Richard Langley (Step hen F. Austin
State University) with contributing authors. Textbook c ontent produced by OpenStax College is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution License 4.0 license. Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/85abf193-2bd...a7ac8df6@9.110).
This page titled 4.1.2: Calorimetry is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax.

4.1.3.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1699924.1.3: The First Law of Thermodynamics
The First Law of Thermodynamics
One of the great achievements of the 19 century was the recognition that heat and work are two forms of the same thing (energy),
and heat and work are the only ways in which we can transfer energy from one obj ect to another. We can summarize these
statements as follows:
In any process, energy can never be created or destroyed; it can only be transferred
from one object to another in the form of heat and/or work.
This statement is called the First Law of Thermodynamics, and it can also be written as a mathematical equation:
Where
is the change in the internal energy of a system (a colle ction of matter)
is the amount of heat transferred into or out of the sys tem
is the amount of work that is done on or by the system
The first law of thermodynamics is actually the law o f conservation of energy stated in a form most usef ul in thermodynamics.
The first law gives the relationship between heat transfer, work done, and the change in internal energy of a system.
Here are three examples. Note that in each case, we must be car eful to specify our system before we assign signs to and.
You heat a beaker of water: If we choose the water to be our system, is a positive n umber, because the heat is moving into the
water. The energy of the water increases when we heat it, so is positive, and must agree with this.
You lift a suitcase: If we consider you to be the system, is a negative number, because you are doing the work. Your bod y’s
energy decreases as you lift the suitcase, so is negative, a nd must agree with this. On the other hand, if we consider the
suitcase to be the system, is a positive number, because the surroundings are doing th e work on the suitcase. (If you aren’t the
system, you are part of the surroundings.)
You drop an ice cube into a beaker of hot water: If we consider the ice cube to be the system, is a posi tive number, because the
ice cube absorbs heat (and gains energy). If we consider th e hot water to be the system. is a negative number, b ecause the
water loses heat (and loses energy).
Heat and Work in the First Law
Heat and work are the two everyday means of bringing energy into or taking energy out of a system. The processes are q uite
different. Heat transfer, a disorganized process, is dri ven by temperature differences. Work, a quite organ ized process, involves a
macroscopic force exerted through a distance. Nevert heless, heat and work can produce identical results. Fo r example, both can
cause a temperature increase. Heat transfer into a syst em, such as when the Sun warms the air in a bicycle tir e, can increase its
temperature, and so can work done on the system, as when the bicyclist pumps air into the tire. Once the tempe rature increase has
occurred, it is impossible to tell whether it was cause d by heat transfer or by doing work. This uncertaint y is an important point.
Heat and work are both energy in transit—neither is st ored as such in a system. However, both can change the internal energy of
a system.
Internal Energy in the First Law
The internal energy of a system is the sum of the kinetic and potenti al energies of its atoms and molecules. Because it i s
impossible to keep track of all individual atoms and molec ules, we must deal with averages and distributions.th
First Law of Thermodynamics and the Law of Conservation of Energy

4.1.3.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169992The internal energy of a system depends only on the state of the system and not how it reached that state. More specifically, is
found to be a function of a few macroscopic quantitie s (pressure, volume, and temperature, for example), i ndependent of past
history such as whether there has been heat transfer o r work done. This independence means that if we know the state of a system,
we can calculate changes in its internal energy from a f ew macroscopic variables.
To get a better idea of how to think about the inter nal energy of a system, let us examine a system goin g from State 1 to State 2.
The system has internal energy in State 1, and it h as internal energy in State 2, no matter how it got t o either state. So the
change in internal energy
is independent of what caused the change. In other word s, is independent of path. By path, we mean the method of getting from
the starting point to the ending point. Why is this i ndependence important? Both and depend on path, but does not
(Equation 6.3.1). This path independence means that interna l energy is easier to consider than either heat transfer o r work done.
Question:
a. Suppose there is heat transfer of 40.00 J to a system, while the system does 10.00 J of work. Later, there is heat trans fer of
25.00 J out of the system while 4.00 J of work is done on the sys tem. What is the net change in internal energy of the
system?
b. What is the change in internal energy of a system when a total of 150.00 J of heat transfer occurs out of (from) th e system
and 159.00 J of work is done on the system
Strategy:
In part (a), we must first find the net heat transfe r and net work done from the given information. Then the first law of
thermodynamics (Equation 6.3.1).
can be used to find the change in internal energy. I n part (b), the net heat transfer and work done are g iven, so the equation can
be used directly.
Solution for (a)
The net heat transfer is the heat transfer into the system minus the heat transfer out of the system, or
Similarly, the total work is the work done by the system minus the work done on the system, or
Adding the net heat transfer and total work gives
Solution for (b)
Here the net heat transfer and total work are given directl y to be and, so that
Discussion
A very different process in part (b) produces the sam e 9.00-J change in internal energy as in part (a). No te that the change in
the system in both parts is related to and not to t he individual s or s involved. The system ends up in the same state in
both (a) and (b). Parts (a) and (b) present two differ ent paths for the system to follow between the same st arting and ending
points, and the change in internal energy for each is the same—it is independent of path.
Example: Calculating Change in Internal Energy - The Same Change in is Produced by Two DifferentProcesses

4.1.3.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169992Summary
The table presents a summary of terms relevant to the fi rst law of thermodynamics.
Term Definition
Internal energy—the sum of the kinetic and potential energies of a
system’s atoms and molecules. Can be divided into many
subcategories, such as thermal and chemical energy. Depe nds only
on the state of a system (such as its, and, not on ho w the
energy entered the system. Change in internal energy is path
independent.
Heat—energy transferred because of a temperature diff erence.
Characterized by random molecular motion. Highly dep endent on
path. entering a system is positive.
Work—energy transferred by a force moving through a distance.
An organized, orderly process. Path dependent. done b y a
system (either against an external force or to increase the volume
of the system) is positive.
The first law of thermodynamics is given as, where is th e change in internal energy of a system, is the net
heat transfer (the sum of all heat transfer into and out o f the system), and is the net work done (the sum of all work do ne on or
by the system).
Both and are energy in transit; only represents an indep endent quantity capable of being stored.
The internal energy of a system depends only on the stat e of the system and not how it reached that state.
Glossary
first law of thermodynamics
states that the change in internal energy of a system eq uals the net heat transfer into the system minus the net work done by the
system
internal energy
the sum of the kinetic and potential energies of a system ’s atoms and molecules
4.1.3: The First Law of Thermodynamics is shared under a CC BY-NC 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

4.1.4.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1699934.1.4: Energy and Chemical Change
Potential Energy and Kinetic Energy for a Chemical System
Any collection of matter has two types of energy, kinetic energy and potential energy. These types of energy are defined as
follows:
Kinetic energy is the energy an object has because it is movi ng.
Potential energy is the energy an object has because of its position.
For example, a rolling ball has energy because it is moving; it can do work if it hits something. A stati onary ball that is high in the
air also has energy, it can do work if it is allowed to fall.
In chemistry, we are primarily concerned with thermal energy and chemical energy. Thermal energy is the energy in a hot object;
a hot piece of metal has more energy than a cold pie ce of metal. Thermal energy is due to the motion of the atoms in the object; in a
hot object, the atoms are moving rapidly, whereas in a cold object they are moving more slowly. Since this en ergy is due to motion,
thermal energy is a type of kinetic energy.
Chemical energy is the energy that will be released or absorbed when chemicals react with one another. For example, Bunsen
burners (and gas applicances) use the reaction betwee n CH (methane, the primary constituent of natural ga s) and O to produce
heat:
If you mix some CH and some oxygen at room temperatu re, the mixture will remain unchanged indefinitely. However, if you
strike a spark, the two gases react violently, produci ng a great deal of thermal energy. This thermal ene rgy does not “come from
nowhere”; it was originally stored in the CH and O mol ecules. This stored energy is undetectable to us unt il the reaction occurs; a
mixture of CH and O looks just like a mixture of He and Ne (which cannot react with one another and have n o stored energy).
The energy that is stored in a mixture of CH and O is chemical energy, and it is due to the positions of the atoms. In this reaction,
the atoms have lower potential energies when the oxyg en atoms are bonded to carbon and hydrogen, rather t han to each other, as
shown below.
Since chemical energy depends on positions of atoms, chemical energy is a type of potential energy. Chemical energy does not
depend on temperature.
Energy transfers and and chemical reactions
Most reactions that we encounter produce thermal energ y; the reacting chemicals, and everything around the m, become hot. Any
reaction that produces thermal energy is called exothermic. In an exothermic reaction, heat seems to come from nowhere.
However, no process can simply create energy, because do ing so would violate the principle of conservation o f energy. Instead,
exothermic reactions convert chemical energy into thermal energy. This thermal energy is then transferred from the rea ction
products to the surroundings. We can illustrate this conve rsion graphically as shown below.4 2
4 2
4 2
4 2

4.1.4.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169993
As you can see from the figure, the overall energy change in any reaction is zero; energ y is neither created nor destroyed. However,
the amount of chemical energy changes in any reaction; the product s never contain the same amount of chemical energy a s the
reactants do. When chemists talk about the “energy of a reaction,” they al ways mean the change in the chemical energy.
Here is a simple example of how we might measure the ene rgy of a reaction. Suppose that we carry out the reacti on in a container
that is surrounded by water. After the reaction, we fi nd that the water is hotter; and by measuring the tem perature change and the
mass, we find that the water has absorbed 50 kJ of heat. From the standpoint of the water, the heat is a posit ive number, since the
water gained energy. We can write
q = + 50 kJ
where the subscript “water” means that the water is our syste m (for the moment).
Now, our real interest is in the chemical reaction. Rec all the the First Law of Thermodynamics: In any process, energy can never be
created or destroyed; it can only be transferred fro m one object to another in the form of heat and/or wor k. Or, stated as a
mathematical equation:. The First Law tells us that the heat that went into the water must have come out of the reacting
chemicals, so the reacting chemicals must have lost 5 0 kJ of heat. From the standpoint of the chemicals, the h eat is a negative
number. We can write:
q = -50 kJ
We did not allow any work to be done, so w = 0. Now we ca n use the First Law of Thermodynamics to calculate th e energy
change that occurred in the chemicals.
E = q + w
= (-50 kJ) + 0 kJ
= -50 kJ
The energy of the chemicals decreased by 50 kJ during the re action. This is the change in the chemical energy; the reactants
had 50 kJ more potential energy than the products did. Note t hat the value of is negative; is negative for an exothermic
reaction.
Some reactions consume thermal energy. In this type of reaction, called an endothermic reaction, the chemicals and their
surroundings become colder. Endothermic reactions convert thermal energy into che mical energy. Since the chemical energy
cannot be felt or detected, these reactions seem to m ake energy disappear. For an endothermic reaction, all of the signs we saw
above are reversed. For instance, suppose that we carry out a reaction in a container that is surrounded by water, and after the
reaction we find that the water has become colder. By measuring the temperature change and the mass, we find that the water has
lost 30 kJ of heat. From the standpoint of the water, th en, q = -30 kJ. This heat was absorbed by the reacting ch emicals, so from the
standpoint of the chemicals, q = +30 kJ. By the First Law of Thermodynamics, = +30 kJ for this reaction. T he products have 30
kJ more chemical energy than the reactants had. is positive for an endothermic reaction.
Here is a summary of the differences between exothermic and endothermic reactions:water
chemicals
chemicals
chemicals chemicals chemicals

4.1.4.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169993In an exothermic reaction:
Everything gets warmer.
The reaction changes chemical energy into thermal ener gy.
q is positive for the surroundings.
q is negative for the chemicals.
is negative.
In an endothermic reaction:
Everything gets colder.
The reaction changes thermal energy into chemical ene rgy.
q is negative for the surroundings.
q is positive for the chemicals.
is positive.

Energy and Reaction Stoichiometry
The amount of energy that a reaction produces or abs orbs depends on the amounts of chemicals that react. This should seem
obvious; for instance, two gallons of gasoline produc e twice as much heat as one gallon of gasoline. When c hemists report E
values for a reaction, they must therefore specify the amounts of chemicals that were used. There are two ways that chemists do
this.
Option 1: Give the energy on a per mole (or per gram) basis, based on the most important chemical.
This option is used for physical processes that involv e one chemical (such as evaporation or dissolving), a nd it is also commonly
used for combustion reactions. For example, a chemist might say that = -884.7 kJ/mol for the combustion o f CH (g). This
statement tells us that if we allow one mole of CH to react with excess oxygen, we will get 884.7 kJ of energ y. The negative sign
of DE tells us that the chemical energy decreases by 884.7 kJ. This chemical energy is change d into thermal energy, so the
chemicals create 884.7 kJ of thermal energy.
Option 2: Give a balanced chemical equation, and give the energy that is produced by the numbers of moles in the
chemical equation.
This is the most common option. For instance, we might see t he following statement:
This statement tells us that when 2 moles of Ag (aq) reac ts with 1 mole of S (aq), we get 277 kJ of energy. We would not write “
= -277 kJ/mol for the reaction of Ag and S ”, because the unit “kJ/mol” implies “kilojoules per one mole”, but we must use
two moles of Ag to get our 277 kJ of energy.
The ratio of energy to moles is a constant for any reaction. This fact allows us to calculate the energ y change (and therefore the
heat) when any amount of a chemical reacts. For instanc e, suppose that we react 0.25 mol of AgNO (aq) with excess Na S. We can
set up the following proportionality:
The values in the left-hand fraction come from the b alanced equation above: we get 277 kJ of energy when we use 2 moles of
AgNO. The in the right-hand fraction represents the e nergy we get when we use 0.25 moles of AgNO. Solving this e quation
gives us = -34.6 kJ, so we get 34.6 kJ of energy when 0.25 mol of AgNO (aq) reacts with excess Na S(aq).
PV work
The most practical way to measure for a reaction is to carry out the reaction under conditions in which all of the energy is
produced in the form of heat, because heat is much ea sier to measure than work. For most reactions, this is simpl e enough; most4
+ 2–
+ 2–
3 2
3 3
3 2

4.1.4.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169993reactions will not do work unless the energy of the rea ction is harnessed by some sort of machine. However, re actions that produce
or consume gases are an exception. If the reaction produces a gas, the gas must push the atmosphere out of the way to make room
for itself. This “pushing the atmosphere out of the way” involves motion (the reaction mixture expands) a gainst a resistance (the
atmospheric pressure), so it is work. The work that is don e is given by the expression:
w = –P x V
where P is the pressure exerted by the surrounding at mosphere, and is the change in the volume of the re action mixture
as it produces the gas. The negative sign is needed b ecause the reaction mixture is doing the work; rememb er that when a system
does work, its energy decreases. The figure below illustrates this type of work.
If a reaction consumes a gas, the reaction mixture becomes smaller as the gas is consumed, and the surrou nding atmosphere must
push inward to fill the empty space. In this case, the a tmosphere does the work, but the equation
w = –P x V
still applies. In this case, V is a negative number wh en the reaction mixture contracts, while w is positive, r eflecting the fact that
the surroundings are doing the work.
These types of work are called PV work, and they occur whenever we carry out a reaction tha t involves gas production or
consumption in an open container. Therefore, if we wa nt to ensure that no work is done during a reaction, we must carry out the
reaction in a sealed container that cannot expand o r contract. As long as the volume of the reaction mixture is con stant, no PV
work can be done. If the reaction produces a gas, the gas must squeeze itself into the existing space, but i t cannot do work, because
it cannot move the walls of the container. (Remember that work requires motion: if nothing moves, there is no work.) If the
reaction consumes a gas, it will decrease the pressur e in the container, but the surrounding atmosphere c annot collapse the walls of
the container to equalize the pressures, so again, the re is no work.
Whenever a reaction does PV work, the amount of heat t hat it produces or absorbs will be different from, b ecause equals
the heat only when w = 0. For example, if we burn one mol e of CH in an open container, the reaction produces 884.7 kJ of energy
(as we saw above), but we get 889.7 kJ of heat from th e reaction. At first glance, this seems impossible; ho w can the heat be larger
than the overall energy? However, if we go back and look at th e balanced equation…
CH (g) + 2 O (g) -> CO (g) + 2 H O(l)
…we see that this reaction converts three moles of ga ses (one mole of CH plus two moles of O) into one mo le of a gas (CO)
plus two moles of a liquid (H O). Liquids have vastly s maller volumes than gases; at 25ºC and 1 atm, a mole of any gas occupies
about 24.5 L under these conditions, whereas a mole of liquid water occupies just 0.018 L. Therefore, the tot al volume of the
reaction mixture decreases, as shown below.external
external
external
4 2 2 2
4 2 2

4.1.4.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169993
Note that the reaction mixture will not shrink on its own; the atmosphere must push inward and force the r eaction mixture to
become smaller. As the atmosphere compresses the reac tion mixture, it does work. If the reaction occurred i n a flexible container,
we could see this work being done; for example, if the reaction took place in a balloon, the balloon would s hrink dramatically.
However, this work occurs whenever the external pressure is con stant, regardless of whether we can see it.
In our example here, the atmosphere does 5.0 kJ of wor k. (You’ll see how to calculate this in a moment.) Sinc e the surroundings
are doing the work, w is a positive value from the st andpoint of the reaction mixture; w = +5.0 kJ. The Fi rst Law then
governs the amount of heat we obtain:
E = q + w
-884.7 kJ = q + 5.0 kJ
q = -889.7 kJ
The physical meaning of these numbers is that the reac tion converts 884.7 kJ of chemical energy into therma l energy, which comes
out in the form of heat. The surrounding atmosphere contributes an additional 5.0 kJ as it compresses the r eaction mixture. The
reaction mixture converts this work into additional h eat, so we get a total of 889.7 kJ of heat.
We can calculate the PV work using the equation w = –P x V. However, a much more convenient expression can b e
derived using the ideal gas law. To do so, we make a few assump tions:
The internal pressure is essentially equal to the exter nal pressure at all times, and the internal pressure is du e entirely to the
gases in the reaction mixture.
The final temperature equals the initial temperature (whic h is reasonable if we want to extract all of the heat from a reaction).
The volumes of any solids and liquids are so much smaller than the volumes of the gases that we can ignore them. We a lso
make the substitution = V – V.
Using these assumptions, we get:
w = –P
= –(PV – PV)
= –(RTn – RTn)
= –RT(n – n)
= –RTDn
w = -RT∆n
By this derivation, we see that when the pressure remai ns constant, the PV work depends only on the temperatu re and the change in
the number of moles of gases during the reaction. To ge t our value of w in joules, we must use R = 8.314 J/mol·K.
For example, here is how we would calculate the PV work fo r the combustion of one mole of CH at constant press ure. The
balanced equation is:
CH (g) + 2 O (g) --> CO (g) + 2 H O(l)reaction
reaction reaction reaction
reaction
reaction
PV external
final initial
PV
final initial
final initial
final initial
gases
PV gases
PV
4 2 2 2

4.1.4.6 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169993The reaction converts 3 moles of gaseous reactants i nto 1 mole of gaseous product (plus some liquid water, which we ignore).
Therefore, n = 1 mol – 3 mol = -2 mol. Using T = 298 K (25ºC), we get:
w = -(8.314 J/mol·K)(298 K)(-2 mol) = 4955 J = 4.955 kJ ≈ 5.0 kJ*
It is worth noting that PV work can only occur if a reaction produces more o r fewer moles of gas than it consumes.** Many
reactions do not involve gases at all, including pre cipitation reactions and acid-base reactions. A few r eactions produce the same
number of moles of gases that they consume, so the volume does n ot change. Here is an example:
C(s) + O (g) --> CO (g)
*If we know the values of P and V, we can also calc ulate the PV work by multiplying P x V, then using th e conversion 1 L·atm =
101.325 J.
**Strictly, a tiny amount of PV work occurs even when a reaction involves only solids and liquids, but th is PV work is so small that
it does not produce a detectable change in the heat.
This reaction consumes a mole of gas (the O) and pro duces a mole of gas (the CO), so there is no change in the total number of
moles of gases (n = 0) and therefore no PV work. This s ituation is uncommon, though; for most reactions that involve gases,
the number of moles of gases changes during the react ion, so PV work can occur.
The amount of PV work that will occur during a reactio n is typically much smaller than E for the reaction, so ignoring it doesn’t
usually introduce a very large error. Here are a few e xamples of reactions involving gases, with their and w values
(calculated at room temperature, 298 K). Only for the last reaction is w a significant fraction of the overall e nergy change.
For most of these reactions, ignoring the PV work and ass uming that all of the energy is transferred in the form of heat would not
produce a significant error. However, chemists do not li ke to introduce errors into their work if they can a void it. As we saw earlier,
we can eliminate PV work by using a sealed, rigid contai ner to carry out reactions that involve gases. Unfortun ately, while carrying
out reactions in sealed, rigid containers is feasible, it is not particularly practical for most applicatio ns. If we want to use a chemical
reaction to heat our homes, or to power an engine, or to make a useful product, we need to expose the reac tion mixture to the
surroundings, and doing so allows PV work to occur. As a re sult, PV work presents an annoying complication wheneve r we want to
calculate the heat that a reaction will give off or abso rb.
Next, we will look at how chemists get around this problem…
4.1.4: Energy and Chemical Change is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.gases
PV
2 2
2 2
gases
PV
PV

4.1.5.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1699944.1.5: Enthalpy – A Modified Energy of Reaction
Enthalpy
To avoid having to constantly calculate and compens ate for PV work when they are carrying out reactions in volving gases,
chemists created a modified measure of the energy pr oduced or consumed in a reaction. This measure is ca lled enthalpy and given
the symbol H. Enthalpy is defined as follows:
H = E + PV
Here, E is the chemical energy of a substance, and P a nd V are the pressure and volume of the substance. To calculate a value of H
for a substance, we would need to know the value of E. Si nce it isn’t possible to measure internal energy, we can never calculate or
measure the enthalpy of a substance. However, we can m easure the change in the internal energy of a substance, so we c an also
measure changes in enthalpy.
For instance, suppose we wanted to know the change in e nthalpy (when we convert two moles of NO into one mole of N O.
The chemical equation is:
2 NO (g) --> N O (g)
For this reaction, E is -54.72 kJ. What is (? To find a way to calculate DH, let us start with some algebra, rem embering that H
= E + PV and (= H – H …
= H – H
= (E + PV) – (E + PV)
= (E + P V) – (E + P V)
= (E – E) + (P V – P V)
= + (P V – P V)
The last equation tells us that we can calculate if we can calculate the product P x V before and after t he reaction. Since all of
the chemicals are gases, we can use PV = nRT, but we still need to know the temperature. is normally measured at 25ºC (298
K), so let’s calculate at 298 K. Making the substitution PV = nR T gives us…
= + (n RT – n RT)
= + RT(n – n)
According to the balanced equation, the reaction con verts two moles of gaseous NO into one mole of gaseou s N O, so we can
now calculate (:
= -54.72 kJ + (8.314 J/mol·K)(298 K)(1 mol – 2 mol)
= -54.72 kJ + (-2478 J)
= -54.72 kJ + (-2.478 kJ)
= -57.20 kJ
This value of is a combination of two physical effects. First, the internal energy of the chemicals decreases by 54.72 kJ when
two moles of NO combine to form one mole of N O. Second, the value of PV decreases by 2.478 kJ when two moles of NO
combine to form one mole of N O. This makes sense; whe n the number of moles of gas decreases, the volume or the pressure (or
both) must drop.
Why do chemists use change in enthalpy (more often than (?
What is the utility of combining internal energy an d PV? The answer is that when the pressure is constant, the expression
(P V – P V) equals the PV work, but with the opposite sign. Here’s how we can prove it:
If the pressure is constant, P = P
So we can just write “P” in place of both P and P2 2 4
2 2 4
final initial
final initial
final initial
final final final initial initial initial
final initial final final initial initial
final final initial initial
final initial
final initial
2 2 4
2 2 4 2
2 4
final final initial initial
initial final
initial final

4.1.5.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169994Then (P V – P V) becomes (PV – PV)
Factoring out P gives us P(V – V)
But V – V is an expanded way to write (
So (P V – P V) = P(
The PV work is given by the expression w = -P(
So (P V – P V) = -w
Earlier, we saw that
= + (P V – P V)
So, after all of this algebra, we reach the following state ment
If the pressure is constant, = + (-w)
Now, let’s bring back the First Law of Thermodynamics, which tells us that (= q + w. Substituting this expression for
gives us:
If the pressure is constant, = (q + w) + (-w)
Simplifying this equation, = q + (w - w) where w is all types of work and w is specifically PV work, meaning that the
difference (w - w) is really just any work that is done other than PV work. Substituting (w) into the equation, we arrive at the
following statement:
If the pressure is constant, = q + w
And, as long as we don’t run our reaction in some sort o f machine or battery, etc., then no other work will be done (w = 0) and
the above equation reduced to:
If the pressure is constant, and no work other than PV work is done,
= q
This is why chemists “invented” enthalpy. When the pressure is constant, the for a reaction tells us the amount of heat the
reaction will produce or absorb. We no longer have to calculate PV work. Remember that “constant pressure” simply means that
the reaction occurs in an open container, so the ch emical mixture is free to expand or contract. Since we carry out most reactions
under these conditions, chemists normally use instead of to describe the energy given off or absorbed by a reaction.
Let’s put this idea into practice. A while ago, we loo ked at the reaction 2 NO (g) --> N O (g), and we found th at for this reaction,
= -54.72 kJ and = -57.20 kJ. What do these numbers tell us?
If we carry out the reaction in a sealed, rigid contai ner, the amount of heat we get will equal: we will get 54.72 k J of heat.
If we carry out the reaction in an open container, the amount of heat we get will equal: we will get 57.20 kJ of he at.
It is important to recognize that the values of and do not depend on whether we carry out the reaction in a n open or closed
container. For this reaction, is -57.20 kJ even if the reaction occurs in a sealed, rigid container. However, under th ese
conditions, does not equal the heat. In fact, doesn’ t really mean anything very useful when we are in a sea led, rigid
container. All it tells us is that the quantity (E + PV) is decreasing by 57.20 kJ. Since E itself decreases b y 54.72 kJ, the product P·V
decreases by 2.48 kJ (we can write this as = -2.48 kJ). In a sealed, rigid container, P·V changes because P c hanges while V
stays constant; since V is constant, there is no PV work. In an open container, P·V changes because V changes wh ile P stays
constant; in this case, there is PV work. The following two f igures compare the two ways of running the reaction.final final initial initial final initial
final initial
final initial
final final initial initial
PV
final final initial initial PV
final final initial initial
PV
PV
PV PV
PV other
other
other
2 2 4

4.1.5.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169994
And so, if a chemical or physical process is carried o ut at constant pressure with the only work done caused by expansion or
contraction, then the heat flow () and enthalpy change () for the process are equal.
The heat given off when you operate a Bunsen burner i s equal to the enthalpy change of the methane combu stion reaction that takes
place, since it occurs at the essentially constant pres sure of the atmosphere. On the other hand, the heat pr oduced by a reaction
measured in a bomb calorimeter is not equal to bec ause the closed, constant-volume metal container pr events expansion work
from occurring. Chemists usually perform experiment s under normal atmospheric conditions, at constant e xternal pressure with
, which makes enthalpy the most convenient choice for det ermining heat.
The following conventions apply when we use:
1. Chemists use a thermochemical equation to represent th e changes in both matter and energy. In a thermochem ical equation, the
enthalpy change of a reaction is shown as a Δ H value following the equation for the reaction. This value indicates the

4.1.5.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169994amount of heat associated with the reaction involving the n umber of moles of reactants and products as shown in the chemical
equation. For example, consider this equation:
This equation indicates that when 1 mole of hydrogen gas an d 12 mole of oxygen gas at some temperature and pressure c hange
to 1 mole of liquid water at the same temperature and pressur e, 286 kJ of heat are released to the surroundings. If the
coefficients of the chemical equation are multiplied by some factor, the enthalpy change must be multiplied b y that same factor
(ΔH is an extensive property).
2. The enthalpy change of a reaction depends on the physi cal state of the reactants and products of the reaction (whe ther we have
gases, liquids, solids, or aqueous solutions), so these mu st be shown. For example, when 1 mole of hydrogen gas and 1/2 mole
of oxygen gas change to 1 mole of liquid water at the same temperature and pressure, 286 kJ of heat are released. If ga seous
water forms, only 242 kJ of heat are released.
3. A negative value of an enthalpy change, Δ H, indicates an exothermic reaction; a positive value o f ΔH indicates an endothermic
reaction. If the direction of a chemical equation is r eversed, the arithmetic sign of its Δ H is changed (a process that is
endothermic in one direction is exothermic in the opposi te direction).
When 0.0500 mol of HCl(aq) reacts with 0.0500 mol of NaOH(aq) to form 0.0500 mol of NaCl(aq), 2.9 kJ of heat are
produced. What is ΔH, the enthalpy change, per mole of acid reacting, for the acid-base reaction run under the conditions
described?
Solution
For the reaction of 0.0500 mol acid (HCl), q = −2.9 kJ. Thi s ratio
can be used as a conversion factor to find the heat produ ced when 1 mole of HCl reacts:
The enthalpy change when 1 mole of HCl reacts is −58 kJ. Since that is the number of moles in the chemical equ ation, we
write the thermochemical equation as:
\[\ce{HCl(aq)+NaOH(aq) \rightarrow NaCl(aq)+H2O(l) \;\;\; ΔH=\m athrm{−58\;kJ} \nonumber\]
When 1.34 g Zn(s) reacts with 60.0 mL of 0.750 M HCl(aq), 3.14 kJ of heat are produced. Determine the enthalpy change per
mole of zinc reacting for the reaction:

AnswerExample: Measurement of an Enthalpy Change
Exercise

4.1.5.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169994ΔH = −153 kJ
Be sure to take both stoichiometry and limiting reactant s into account when determining the Δ H for a chemical reaction.
A gummy bear contains 2.67 g sucrose, C H O. When it re acts with 7.19 g potassium chlorate, KClO, 43.7 kJ of h eat are
produced. Determine the enthalpy change for the reactio n
Solution
We have available, and
available.
Since
is needed, C H O is the excess reactant and KClO is the li miting reactant.
The reaction uses 8 mol KClO, and the conversion fact or is, so we have
. The enthalpy change for this reaction is −5960 kJ, a nd the thermochemical equation
is:
When 1.42 g of iron reacts with 1.80 g of chlorine, 3. 22 g of and 8.60 kJ of heat is produced. What is the enthalpy
change for the reaction when 1 mole of is produced?

Answer
ΔH = −338 kJ
Relating to
The formal relationship between and is = +. Howev er, we do not normally use this equation, because we
do not specify the pressure and volume. As we did on pa ge 11, we assume that any change in volume is due to a change in the
number of moles of gases, so we make the substitution PV = nRT. We also assume constant temperature. This allo ws us to factor
out R and T as shown below:
= + (P V – P V)
= + (n RT – n RT)
= + RT(n – n)
= + RT
We can use this equation to translate into (and vic e versa), regardless of the actual pressure and volume. All we need to
know is the temperature (which must be given to us) a nd the change in the number of moles of gases, which we can get using
stoichiometry.Example: Another Example of the Measurement of an Enthalpy Change
12 22 11 3
12 22 11 3
Exercise
final final initial initial
final initial
final initial

4.1.5.6 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169994For instance, suppose we know that = -918.2 kJ for the following reaction at 298 K:
4 NH (g) + 3 O (g) --> 2 N (g) + 6 H O(l)
What is for this reaction at 298 K? We can use the relationship between and; all we need to do is deter mine the
change in the number of moles of gases. This reaction co nverts 7 moles of gaseous reactants (4 moles of NH and 3 moles of
O) into 2 moles of gaseous products (the N), so \(\Delta n \) = 2 mol – 7 mol = -5 mol.
= -918.2 kJ + (8.314 J/mol·K)(298 K)(-5 mol)
= -918.2 kJ + (-12388 J)
= -918.2 kJ + (-12.4 kJ)
= -930.6 kJ
Easy enough, eh? Just be sure that you pay attention to units; and are normally given in kJ, but the term is
in joules and must be converted to kJ.
4.1.5: Enthalpy – A Modified Energy of Reaction is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
LibreTexts.Example: Calculating given
3 2 2 2
2 2 gases

4.1.6.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1699954.1.6: Putting it All Together
Relating Nonstandard Values of and
In many problems, you will need to interconvert and and you will have to deal with nonstandard values. In any situation
where you must interconvert and, you should always use the standard values. In other words, your strategy m ap should
look like this:
(heat at constant pressure) nonstandard standard standard nonstandard (heat at constant
volume)
You can work through the above sequence either forwar d or backward, and you can start and end anywhere on the map. The
following examples illustrate some typical problem types.
Consider the following reaction:
How much heat will be given off if 7.130 moles of CO reacts with e xcess O in an open container at 25˚C?
Solution
In an open container (constant pressure), the heat eq uals, so we are going to need to convert into. We were given
the standard value of, so we can start by using the e quation to calculate the standard value of.
Once we know that, we can work out the nonstandard value of, whi ch will equal the heat.
Using gives us:
This is for the reaction, corresponding to the reacti on of 2 moles of CO with 1 mole of O. Now we calculate t he
nonstandard value of that corresponds to the reaction o f 7.130 moles of.
Solving this equation gives = -2018 kJ, so the reaction will give off 2018 kJ of heat.
When 0.07563 mol of gaseous reacts with oxygen in a sealed, rigid container, 217.6 kJ of heat is given of f. Calculate
for the following reaction at 25˚C:
Solution
First, let’s be sure that we understand what we’re trying to calculate; the problem is asking for the standard value of for
this reaction. In other words, we need to calculate the ent halpy change when 2 moles of C H burns.
Now, let’s understand the numbers we are given. We are gi ven the amount of heat that is produced when 0.7563 moles of
C H burns in a rigid container. The heat is given off, so q is a negative number:. Under these conditions, t he
volume is constant, so the heat equals (not). This is a nonstandard value, because we didn’t use 2 moles of C H, so
we can say that = -217.6 kJ. To convert into, we need the standard value of. Therefore, our strategy
will be:Example
Example
4 10
4 10
4 10

4.1.6.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169995nonstandard standard standard
We are now ready to start calculating. First, we convert the no nstandard value of into the standard value:
Solving this equation gives = -5754.33 kJ
Finally, we convert the standard value of into the standa rd value of:
When 1.500 g of MgS reacts with excess oxygen at const ant pressure, 9.207 kJ of heat is given off. How much heat would be
given off if the same amount of MgS reacted with oxyge n at constant volume? Assume a temperature of 25˚C f or both
reactions. The chemical reaction is
Solution
We are given the heat at constant pressure, which equ als. This is a nonstandard value, because we did not use 1 mole of
. Our final answer will be a nonstandard value of, sinc e the heat equals when the volume is constant. Our stra tegy
will be:
nonstandard standard standard nonstandard
To begin, we convert the nonstandard value into the standard value. The molar mass of MgS is 56.37 g/mol, so 1.500 g
equals 0.0266099 mol of MgS. Using our normal setup:
Solving this equation gives.
Next, we translate our standard into the standard:
Solving this equation gives = -341.041 kJ. This is.
Finally, we calculate for the reaction of 0.0266099 moles of, which will equal our heat.
Solving this equation gives = -9.075 kJ. We conclude that the reaction gives off 9.075 kJ of heat at constant
volume.
is -90 kJ the reaction
What are q and w when 2 moles of solid KClO reacts at constan t pressure and 25˚C? What is (under these conditions?Example
Example

4.1.6.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169995Solution
The reaction is carried out at constant pressure, so q =. The problem states that we are using 2 moles of KC lO, which
matches the coefficient in the balanced equation, so we ca n use the standard value of:.
To calculate w, we use the formula
Converting to kilojoules (to be consistent with q) give s.
To calculate, we can use our familiar relationship b etween and. However, it is easier to use the First Law o f
Thermodynamics:
Substituting in the values of q and w we just calculate d gives. This reaction produces 97 kJ of energy, of which
90 kJ is released as heat and 7 kJ is used to do PV work.
Note that the PV work we just calculated is the standard value, corresponding to 2 moles of KClO reacting. The n ext example
shows how to deal with a situation where you have a nonstandar d amount of reactant.
If you want to get 2.000 kJ of PV work from the reaction in the previous example, how much should you use?
Solution
In the previous example, we found that 7.436 kJ of PV work is done when 2 moles of reacts. The PV work is
proportional to the amount of reactant (just like and), so we can use the usual technique to calculate the amount of
here.
Solving this equation gives of 0.5379 moles of.
4.1.6: Putting it All Together is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.3
Example

4.1.7.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1699964.1.7: Tabulated Enthalpy Values
Tabulated Values
The enthalpy changes for many types of chemical and physical processes are available in the reference l iterature, including those
for combustion reactions, phase transitions, and form ation reactions. As we discuss these quantities, it is impo rtant to pay attention
to the extensive nature of enthalpy and enthalpy changes. Since the enthalpy change for a given reaction is proportiona l to the
amounts of substances involved, it may be reported on that basis (i.e., as the Δ H for specific amounts of reactants). However, we
often find it more useful to divide one extensive pr operty (Δ H) by another (amount of substance), and report a per -amount intensive
value of Δ H, often “normalized” to a per-mole basis. (Note that this is similar to determining the intensive proper ty specific heat
from the extensive property heat capacity, as seen prev iously.)
A standard state is a commonly accepted set of condi tions used as a reference point for the determination of properties under other
different conditions. For chemists, the IUPAC standard state refers to materials under a pressure of 1 bar an d solutions at 1 M, and
does not specify a temperature (it used too). Many the rmochemical tables list values with a standard state of 1 atm. Because the Δ H
of a reaction changes very little with such small ch anges in pressure (1 bar = 0.987 atm), Δ H values (except for the most precisely
measured values) are essentially the same under both sets of standard conditions. We will include a supersc ripted “o” in the
enthalpy change symbol to designate standard state. Sin ce the usual (but not technically standard) temperat ure is 298.15 K, we will
use a subscripted “298” to designate this temperatu re. Thus, the symbol () is used to indicate an enth alpy change for a
process occurring under these conditions. (The symbol ΔH is used to indicate an enthalpy change for a reactio n occurring under
nonstandard conditions.)
Enthalpy of Combustion
Standard enthalpy of combustion () is the enthalpy ch ange when 1 mole of a substance burns (combines vigo rously with
oxygen) under standard state conditions; it is somet imes called “heat of combustion.” For example, the en thalpy of combustion of
ethanol, −1366.8 kJ/mol, is the amount of heat produc ed when one mole of ethanol undergoes complete combu stion at 25 °C and 1
atmosphere pressure, yielding products also at 25 °C and 1 atm.
Enthalpies of combustion for many substances have be en measured; a few of these are listed in Table. Many readily
available substances with large enthalpies of combusti on are used as fuels, including hydrogen, carbon (as coal or charcoal), and
hydrocarbons (compounds containing only hydrogen and carbon), such as methane, propane, and the major com ponents of
gasoline.
Table: Standard Molar Enthalpies of Combustion

4.1.7.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169996Substance Combustion ReactionEnthalpy of Combustion
carbon −393.5
hydrogen −285.8
magnesium −601.6
sulfur −296.8
carbon monoxide −283.0
methane −890.8
acetylene −1301.1
ethanol −1366.8
methanol −726.1
isooctane −5461
As Figure suggests, the combustion of gasoline is a highly e xothermic process. Let us determine the approximate
amount of heat produced by burning 1.00 L of gasolin e, assuming the enthalpy of combustion of gasoline i s the same as that of
isooctane, a common component of gasoline. The density of isooctane is 0.692 g/mL.
Figure: The combustion of gasoline is very exothermic. (credit: modification of work by “AlexEagle”/Flickr)
Solution
Starting with a known amount (1.00 L of isooctane), we c an perform conversions between units until we arrive a t the desired
amount of heat or energy. The enthalpy of combustion of isooctane provides one of the necessary conversion s. Table
gives this value as −5460 kJ per 1 mole of isooctane (C H).
Using these data,
The combustion of 1.00 L of isooctane produces 33,100 kJ of heat. (This amount of energy is enough to melt 9 9.2 kg, or about
218 lbs, of ice.)
Note: If you do this calculation one step at a time, you would f ind:Example: Using Enthalpy of Combustion
8 18

4.1.7.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169996How much heat is produced by the combustion of 125 g of acet ylene?
Answer
6.25 × 10 kJ
As reserves of fossil fuels diminish and become more co stly to extract, the search is ongoing for replacemen t fuel sources for
the future. Among the most promising biofuels are tho se derived from algae (Figure). The species of algae u sed are
nontoxic, biodegradable, and among the world’s fastest growing organisms. About 50% of algal weight is oil, wh ich can be
readily converted into fuel such as biodiesel. Algae c an yield 26,000 gallons of biofuel per hectare—much more energy per
acre than other crops. Some strains of algae can flour ish in brackish water that is not usable for growing o ther crops. Algae can
produce biodiesel, biogasoline, ethanol, butanol, metha ne, and even jet fuel.
Figure: (a) Tiny algal organisms can be (b) grown in large quantities and eventually (c) turned into a use ful fuel such as
biodiesel. (credit a: modification of work by Micah Sittig; credit b: modification of work by Robert Ke rton; credit c:
modification of work by John F. Williams)
According to the US Department of Energy, only 39,000 s quare kilometers (about 0.4% of the land mass of the US or less than
of the area used to grow corn) can produce enough al gal fuel to replace all the petroleum-based fuel use d in the US. The cost
of algal fuels is becoming more competitive—for ins tance, the US Air Force is producing jet fuel from alga e at a total cost of
under $5 per gallon. The process used to produce alg al fuel is as follows: grow the algae (which use sunligh t as their energy
source and CO as a raw material); harvest the algae; extract the fuel compounds (or precursor compounds); process as
necessary (e.g., perform a transesterification reaction t o make biodiesel); purify; and distribute (Figure).
Figure: Algae convert sunlight and carbon dioxide in to oil that is harvested, extracted, purified, and tr ansformed into a
variety of renewable fuels.
Standard Enthalpy of Formation
A standard enthalpy of formation is an enthalpy ch ange for a reaction in which exactly 1 mole of a pur e substance is formed
from free elements in their most stable states under standard state conditions. These values are especial ly useful for computing or
predicting enthalpy changes for chemical reactions t hat are impractical or dangerous to carry out, or fo r processes for which it isExercise
Emerging Algae-Based Energy Technologies (Biofuels)

4.1.7.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169996difficult to make measurements. If we have values for t he appropriate standard enthalpies of formation, we can determine the
enthalpy change for any reaction, which we will practice in t he next section on Hess’s law.
The standard enthalpy of formation of CO (g) is −393.5 kJ/mol. This is the enthalpy change for the exoth ermic reaction:
starting with the reactants at a pressure of 1 atm a nd 25 °C (with the carbon present as graphite, the m ost stable form of carbon
under these conditions) and ending with one mole of CO, also at 1 atm and 25 °C. For nitrogen dioxide,, is 33.2
kJ/mol. This is the enthalpy change for the reaction:
A reaction equation with mole of N and 1 mole of O is correct in this case because the standard enthalpy o f formation always
refers to 1 mole of product, NO (g).
You will find a table of standard enthalpies of form ation of many common substances in Tables T1 and T2. These values indicate
that formation reactions range from highly exotherm ic (such as −2984 kJ/mol for the formation of P O) to str ongly endothermic
(such as +226.7 kJ/mol for the formation of acetylene, C H). By definition, the standard enthalpy of format ion of an element in its
most stable form is equal to zero under standard condi tions, which is 1 atm for gases and 1 M for solutions.
Ozone, O (g), forms from oxygen, O (g), by an endothermic process. Ultraviolet radiation is the source of the energy that
drives this reaction in the upper atmosphere. Assuming that both the reactants and products of the reaction are in their standard
states, determine the standard enthalpy of formation, o f ozone from the following information:
Solution is the enthalpy change for the formation o f one mole of a substance in its standard state from the elements in
their standard states. Thus, for O (g) is the enthalpy change for the reaction:
For the formation of 2 mol of O (g),. This ratio,, can be used as a conversion fact or to find the
heat produced when 1 mole of O (g) is formed, which is the enthalpy of formation for O (g):
Therefore,.
Hydrogen gas, H, reacts explosively with gaseous chlori ne, Cl, to form hydrogen chloride, HCl(g). What is the enthalpy
change for the reaction of 1 mole of H (g) with 1 mole of Cl (g) if both the reactants and products are at standard state
conditions? The standard enthalpy of formation of HCl(g) is −92.3 kJ/mol.
Answer
For the reaction
Write the heat of formation reaction equations for:
a. 2
2 2
4 10
2 2
Example: Evaluating an Enthalpy of Formation
3 2
3 3
Exercise
2 2
2 2
Example: Writing Reaction Equations for

4.1.7.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169996b.
Solution
Remembering that reaction equations are for forming 1 mole of the compound from its constituent elements under
standard conditions, we have:
a.
b.
Note: The standard state of carbon is graphite, and phospho rus exists as.
Write the heat of formation reaction equations for:
a.
b.
Answer a
Answer b

Summary
If a chemical change is carried out at constant pre ssure and the only work done is caused by expansion or contraction, q for the
change is called the enthalpy change with the symbol ΔH, or for reactions occurring under standard state c onditions. The
value of Δ H for a reaction in one direction is equal in magnit ude, but opposite in sign, to Δ H for the reaction in the opposite
direction, and Δ H is directly proportional to the quantity of reactan ts and products. Examples of enthalpy changes inclu de enthalpy
of combustion, enthalpy of fusion, enthalpy of vapori zation, and standard enthalpy of formation. The stand ard enthalpy of
formation,, is the enthalpy change accompanying the formation of 1 mole of a substance from the elemen ts in their most
stable states at 1 bar (standard state). Many of the processes are carried out at 298.15 K.
Key Equations
Footnotes
1. 1 For more on algal fuel, see www.theguardian.com/environme...n-fuel-problem.
Glossary
chemical thermodynamics
area of science that deals with the relationships between heat, work, and all forms of energy associated with chemical and
physical processes
enthalpy (H)
sum of a system’s internal energy and the mathematical pro duct of its pressure and volume
enthalpy change (Δ H)
heat released or absorbed by a system under constant pre ssure during a chemical or physical process
expansion work (pressure-volume work)Exercise

4.1.7.6 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169996work done as a system expands or contracts against exter nal pressure
first law of thermodynamics
internal energy of a system changes due to heat flow in or out of the system or work done on or by the systemydrocarbon
compound composed only of hydrogen and carbon; the ma jor component of fossil fuels
internal energy (U)
total of all possible kinds of energy present in a substan ce or substances
standard enthalpy of combustion ()
heat released when one mole of a compound undergoes complet e combustion under standard conditions
standard enthalpy of formation ()
enthalpy change of a chemical reaction in which 1 mole of a pure substance is formed from its elements in their most sta ble
states under standard state conditions
standard state
set of physical conditions as accepted as common referenc e conditions for reporting thermodynamic properties; 1 bar of
pressure, and solutions at 1 molar concentrations, usually at a temperature of 298.15 K
state function
property depending only on the state of a system, and n ot the path taken to reach that state
Contributors and Attributions
Paul Flowers (University of North Carolina - Pembroke), Kla us Theopold (University of Delaware) and Richard Langl ey
(Stephen F. Austin State University) with contributing au thors. Textbook content produced by OpenStax College i s licensed
under a Creative Commons Attribution License 4.0 license. Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/85abf1932bd...a7ac8df6@9.110).
4.1.7: Tabulated Enthalpy Values is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

4.1.8.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1699974.1.8: Hess's Law
Hess’s Law
There are two ways to determine the amount of heat in volved in a chemical change: measure it experimenta lly, or calculate it from
other experimentally determined enthalpy changes. Som e reactions are difficult, if not impossible, to in vestigate and make accurate
measurements for experimentally. And even when a react ion is not hard to perform or measure, it is conveni ent to be able to
determine the heat involved in a reaction without having t o perform an experiment.
This type of calculation usually involves the use of Hess’s law, which states: If a process can be written as the sum of several
stepwise processes, the enthalpy change of the total p rocess equals the sum of the enthalpy changes of the various steps. Hess’s law
is valid because enthalpy is a state function: Entha lpy changes depend only on where a chemical process st arts and ends, but not on
the path it takes from start to finish. For example, we c an think of the reaction of carbon with oxygen to fo rm carbon dioxide as
occurring either directly or by a two-step process. The di rect process is written:
In the two-step process, first carbon monoxide is formed:
Then, carbon monoxide reacts further to form carbon di oxide:
The equation describing the overall reaction is the sum o f these two chemical changes:
Because the CO produced in Step 1 is consumed in Step 2, the net change is:
According to Hess’s law, the enthalpy change of the rea ction will equal the sum of the enthalpy changes of t he steps. We can apply
the data from the experimental enthalpies of combusti on in Table to find the enthalpy change of the ent ire reaction from its
two steps:
The result is shown in Figure. We see that ΔH of the ov erall reaction is the same whether it occurs in one st ep or two. This
finding (overall ΔH for the reaction = sum of Δ H values for reaction “steps” in the overall reaction) is true in general for chemical
and physical processes.

4.1.8.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169997
Figure: The formation of CO (g) from its elements can be thought of as occurring in two steps, which sum to t he overall
reaction, as described by Hess’s law. The horizontal blu e lines represent enthalpies. For an exothermic process, the products are at
lower enthalpy than are the reactants.
Before we further practice using Hess’s law, let us recall two im portant features of Δ H.
1. ΔH is directly proportional to the quantities of reac tants or products. For example, the enthalpy change for th e reaction forming
1 mole of NO (g) is +33.2 kJ:
When 2 moles of NO (twice as much) are formed, the Δ H will be twice as large:
In general, if we multiply or divide an equation by a number, then the enthalpy change should also be mu ltiplied or divided by
the same number.
2. ΔH for a reaction in one direction is equal in magnitude an d opposite in sign to Δ H for the reaction in the reverse direction. For
example, given that:
Then, for the “reverse” reaction, the enthalpy change is also “reversed”:
Using Hess’s Law Determine the enthalpy of formation,, o f FeCl (s) from the enthalpy changes of the following t wo-step
process that occurs under standard state conditions:
Solution
We are trying to find the standard enthalpy of formation of FeCl3(s), which is equal to ΔH for the reaction:
Looking at the reactions, we see that the reaction for which we want to find Δ H is the sum of the two reactions with known Δ H
values, so we must sum their Δ Hs:2
Example: Stepwise Calculation of

4.1.8.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169997The enthalpy of formation,, of FeCl (s) is −399.5 kJ/mol.
Calculate ΔH for the process:
from the following information:
Answer
66.4 kJ
Here is a less straightforward example that illustrate s the thought process involved in solving many Hess’s law problems. It shows
how we can find many standard enthalpies of formation (and o ther values of Δ H) if they are difficult to determine experimentally.
Using Hess’s Law Chlorine monofluoride can react with fluor ine to form chlorine trifluoride:
(i)
Use the reactions here to determine the ΔH for reaction (i):
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
Solution
Our goal is to manipulate and combine reactions (ii), (iii), and (iv) such that they add up to reaction (i). Going from left to right
in (i), we first see that is needed as a reactant. Thi s can be obtained by multiplying reaction (iii) by, which means that
the ΔH° change is also multiplied by:
Next, we see that is also needed as a reactant. To get this, reverse and halve reaction (ii), which means that the ΔH changes
sign and is halved:
To get ClF as a product, reverse (iv), changing the sign o f ΔH:
Now check to make sure that these reactions add up to the r eaction we want:3
Exercise
Example: A More Challenging Problem

4.1.8.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169997Reactants and cancel out product O; product canc els reactant; and reactant is cancelled by
products and OF. This leaves only reactants ClF(g) and F (g) and product ClF (g), which are what we want. Since
summing these three modified reactions yields the re action of interest, summing the three modified ΔH valu es will give the
desired ΔH:

Aluminum chloride can be formed from its elements:
(i)
Use the reactions here to determine the ΔH° for reaction (i):
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
Answer
−1407 kJ
Hess's Law and Enthalpies of Formation
We also can use Hess’s law to determine the enthalpy ch ange of any reaction if the corresponding enthalpie s of formation of the
reactants and products are available. The stepwise re actions we consider are: (i) decompositions of the rea ctants into their
component elements (for which the enthalpy changes are proportional to the negative of the enthalpies of formation of the
reactants), followed by (ii) re-combinations of the elements to give the products (with the enthalpy chan ges proportional to the
enthalpies of formation of the products). The standar d enthalpy change of the overall reaction is therefo re equal to: (ii) the sum of
the standard enthalpies of formation of all the pro ducts plus (i) the sum of the negatives of the standa rd enthalpies of formation of
the reactants. This is usually rearranged slightly to be written as follows, with representing “the sum of” a nd n standing for the
stoichiometric coefficients:
The following example shows in detail why this equation is valid, and how to use it to calculate the enthal py change for a reaction
of interest.
What is the standard enthalpy change for the reaction:
Solution 1: Using the Equation
Alternatively, we could use the special form of Hess’s law given previously:2
2 2 3
Exercise
Example: Using Hess’s Law

4.1.8.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169997Solution 2: Supporting Why the General Equation Is Valid
We can write this reaction as the sum of the decompo sitions of 3NO (g) and 1H O(l) into their constituent elements, and the
formation of 2 HNO (aq) and 1 NO(g) from their constituent elements. Writing out thes e reactions, and noting their
relationships to the values for these compounds (from Ta bles T1 and T2), we have:
Summing these reaction equations gives the reaction we are interested in:
Summing their enthalpy changes gives the value we want to determ ine:
So the standard enthalpy change for this reaction is ΔH = −138.4 kJ.
Note that this result was obtained by:
1. multiplying the of each product by its stoichiometri c coefficient and summing those values,
2. multiplying the of each reactant by its stoichiometric coefficient and summing those values, and then
3. subtracting the result found in step 2 from the result found in step 1.
This is also the procedure in using the general equation, as shown.
Calculate the heat of combustion of 1 mole of ethan ol, C H OH(l), when H O(l) and CO (g) are formed. Use the following
enthalpies of formation: C H OH(l), −278 kJ/mol; H O(l), −286 kJ/mol; and CO (g), −394 kJ/mol.
Answer
−1368 kJ/mol
Summary
If a chemical change is carried out at constant pre ssure and the only work done is caused by expansion or contraction, q for the
change is called the enthalpy change with the symbol ΔH. The value of Δ H for a reaction in one direction is equal in magnit ude,
but opposite in sign, to Δ H for the reaction in the opposite direction, and Δ H is directly proportional to the quantity of reacta nts and
products. Examples of enthalpy changes include enthalp y of combustion, enthalpy of fusion, enthalpy of vapo rization, and standard
enthalpy of formation. The standard enthalpy of for mation,, is the enthalpy change accompanying the f ormation of 1 mole of a2 2
Exercise
2 5 2 2
2 5 2 2

4.1.8.6 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169997substance from the elements in their most stable sta tes at 1 bar (standard state). Many of the processes a re carried out at 298.15 K.
If the enthalpies of formation are available for the reactants and products of a reaction, the enthalpy change can be calculated using
Hess’s law: If a process can be written as the sum of se veral stepwise processes, the enthalpy change of the tot al process equals the
sum of the enthalpy changes of the various steps.
Key Equations
Footnotes
1. 1 For more on algal fuel, see www.theguardian.com/environme...n-fuel-problem.
Glossary
chemical thermodynamics
area of science that deals with the relationships between heat, work, and all forms of energy associated with chemical and
physical processes
enthalpy (H)
sum of a system’s internal energy and the mathematical pro duct of its pressure and volume
enthalpy change (Δ H)
heat released or absorbed by a system under constant pre ssure during a chemical or physical process
expansion work (pressure-volume work)
work done as a system expands or contracts against exter nal pressure
first law of thermodynamics
internal energy of a system changes due to heat flow in or out of the system or work done on or by the system
Hess’s law
if a process can be represented as the sum of several steps, the enthalpy change of the process equals the sum of the en thalpy
changes of the steps
hydrocarbon
compound composed only of hydrogen and carbon; the ma jor component of fossil fuels
internal energy (U)
total of all possible kinds of energy present in a substan ce or substances
standard enthalpy of combustion ()
heat released when one mole of a compound undergoes complet e combustion under standard conditions
standard enthalpy of formation ()
enthalpy change of a chemical reaction in which 1 mole of a pure substance is formed from its elements in their most sta ble
states under standard state conditions
standard state
set of physical conditions as accepted as common referenc e conditions for reporting thermodynamic properties; 1 bar of
pressure, and solutions at 1 molar concentrations, usually at a temperature of 298.15 K
state function
property depending only on the state of a system, and n ot the path taken to reach that state

4.1.8.7 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/169997Contributors and Attributions
Paul Flowers (University of North Carolina - Pembroke), Kla us Theopold (University of Delaware) and Richard Langl ey
(Stephen F. Austin State University) with contributing au thors. Textbook content produced by OpenStax College i s licensed
under a Creative Commons Attribution License 4.0 license. Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/85abf1932bd...a7ac8df6@9.110).
4.1.8: Hess's Law is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1SECTION OVERVIEW
Topic E- Atomic Structure
WHAT YOU SHOULD BE ABLE TO DO WHEN YOU HA VE FINISHED THIS TOPIC:
Electromagnetic radiation
1. Interconvert frequency and wavelength for electromagn etic radiation, and relate each of these to photon ene rgy in J (per
photon) and in kJ/mol. (and)
Electron energy levels and atomic emission spectra
2. Recognize that electrons can only exist in certain allo wed energy states.
3. Recognize that in light emission and absorption, the photon energy equals the energy difference between two e lectron
energy states. (E = |ΔE |)
4. Understand the measurement and meaning of ionization en ergy.
Special case: Bohr model (electronic structure of a one-ele cton atom or ion)
5. Use the Bohr energy equation to calculate the energie s of the quantum levels in a hydrogen atom and in one-elect ron ions.
6. Calculate the energy, wavelength or frequency of light that corresponds to any electron transition in a one-elect ron atom or
ion (using the Rydberg equation or the Bohr energy equat ion.)
General case: Quantum Mechanical model (modern electronic st ructure of an atom)
7. Understand that an energy state for a one-electron ato m can be described by a wave function Ψ (atomic orbital); an d
describe the general shape of s, p and d orbitals.
8. Understand the relationship between atomic wave functi ons Ψ (atomic orbitals) and the quantum numbers,, an d.
9. Know and apply the rules that govern the allowed values of t he quantum numbers,, and.
10. Understand the physical meaning of and.
11. Understand that one-electron wave functions (atomic orbitals) can be used to “build-up” a total wave functio n describing a
multi-electron atom (i.e. electron configurations.)
12. Understand how orbital energy for one-electron atoms depends only on quantum number n and how orbital energy for
multi-electron atoms depends on the quantum numbers n, l, and m.
13. Understand how the quantum number m describes electro n spin, and the significance of the Pauli Principle and Hund ’s
Rule in multi-electron atoms.
14. Predict the electron configurations for all of the ele ments in the periodic table, and identify a configurati on as diamagnetic
or paramagnetic.
15. Relate the electron configurations of the element s to the following properties, with a focus on the periodic nature of these
properties: Ionization energy, Atomic radius, Ionic ra dius, Electronegativity, and Electron affinity.
5.1: Electronic Structure of Atoms
5.1.1: The Wave Nature of Light
5.1.2: The Particle Nature of Light
5.1.3: Atomic Emission Spectra and the Bohr Model
5.1.4: The Wave Behavior of Matter
5.1.5: Quantum Mechanics and Atomic Orbitals
5.1.6: 3D Representation of Orbitals
5.1.7: Many-Electron Atoms
5.1.8: Electron ConfigurationsLearning Objectives
photon electron
l
s

25.2: Periodic Properties of the Elements
5.2.1: Development of the Periodic Table
5.2.2: Shielding and Effective Nuclear Charge
5.2.3: Sizes of Atoms and Ions
5.2.4: Ionization Energy
5.2.5: Electron Affinities
5.2.6: Metals, Nonmetals, and Metalloids
5.2.7: Group Trends for the Active Metals
5.2.8: Group Trends for Selected Nonmetals
Topic E- Atomic Structure is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
5.1: Electronic Structure of Atoms
In this chapter, we describe how electrons are arrange d in atoms and how the spatial arrangements of electr ons are related to their
energies. We also explain how knowing the arrangement of electrons in an atom enables chemists to predict and explain the
chemistry of an element. As you study the material pr esented in this chapter, you will discover how the sha pe of the periodic table
reflects the electronic arrangements of elements. In this and subsequent chapters, we build on this inform ation to explain why
certain chemical changes occur and others do not. Aft er reading this chapter, you will know enough about t he theory of the
electronic structure of atoms to explain what causes the characteristic colors of neon signs, how laser be ams are created, and why
gemstones and fireworks have such brilliant colors. In later chapters, we will develop the concepts introduce d here to explain why
the only compound formed by sodium and chlorine is NaCl, an ionic compound, whereas neon and argon do not form any stable
compounds, and why carbon and hydrogen combine to form an almost endless array of covalent compounds, such as CH, C H,
C H, and C H. You will discover that knowing how to use the periodic table is the single most important skil l you can acquire to
understand the incredible chemical diversity of the el ements.
5.1.1: The Wave Nature of Light
5.1.2: The Particle Nature of Light
5.1.3: Atomic Emission Spectra and the Bohr Model
5.1.4: The Wave Behavior of Matter
5.1.5: Quantum Mechanics and Atomic Orbitals
5.1.6: 3D Representation of Orbitals
5.1.7: Many-Electron Atoms
5.1.8: Electron Configurations
Thumbnail: Electron shell diagram for Sodium, the 19th elemen t in the periodic table of elements. (CC BY-SA; 2.5; Pumbaa)
5.1: Electronic Structure of Atoms is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.4 2 2
2 4 2 6

5.1.1.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1700035.1.1: The Wave Nature of Light
To learn about the characteristics of electromagnetic wav es. Light, X-Rays, infrared and microwaves are among the ty pes
of electromagnetic waves.
Scientists discovered much of what we know about the st ructure of the atom by observing the interaction of atoms with various
forms of radiant, or transmitted, energy, such as the e nergy associated with the visible light we detect with our eyes, the infrared
radiation we feel as heat, the ultraviolet light tha t causes sunburn, and the x-rays that produce images of our teeth or bones. All
these forms of radiant energy should be familiar to you. We begin our discussion of the development of ou r current atomic model
by describing the properties of waves and the various forms of electromagnetic radiation.
Figure: A Wave in Water. When a drop of water falls onto a smooth water surface, it generates a set of wave s that travel
outward in a circular direction.
Properties of Waves
A wave is a periodic oscillation that transmits energ y through space. Anyone who has visited a beach or dropp ed a stone into a
puddle has observed waves traveling through water (Figu re). These waves are produced when wind, a stone, or some other
disturbance, such as a passing boat, transfers energy t o the water, causing the surface to oscillate up and d own as the energy travels
outward from its point of origin. As a wave passes a par ticular point on the surface of the water, anything fl oating there moves up
and down.
Figure: Important Properties of Waves (a) Wavelength (λ in meters), frequency (ν, in Hz), and amplitude are indicated on
this drawing of a wave. (b) The wave with the shortest wavelength has the greatest number of wavelengths per unit time (i.e., the
highest frequency). If two waves have the same frequen cy and speed, the one with the greater amplitude has the higher energy.Learning Objectives

5.1.1.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170003Waves have characteristic properties (Figure). As you may have noticed in Figure, waves are periodic, that is, they
repeat regularly in both space and time. The distance between two corresponding points in a wave—between the midpoints of two
peaks, for example, or two troughs—is the wavelength (, lowercase Greek lambda). Wavelengths are described by a unit of
distance, typically meters. The frequency (, lowercase Greek nu) of a wave is the number of oscil lations that pass a particular
point in a given period of time. The usual units ar e oscillations per second (1/s = s), which in the SI system is called the hertz
(Hz). It is named after German physicist Heinrich Hertz (1 857–1894), a pioneer in the field of electromagnetic ra diation.
The amplitude, or vertical height, of a wave is defined as half th e peak-to-trough height; as the amplitude of a wave with a given
frequency increases, so does its energy. As you can see in Figure, two waves can have the same amplitude but different
wavelengths and vice versa. The distance traveled by a wave per unit time is its speed v, which is typicall y measured in meters per
second (m/s). The speed of a wave is equal to the product of i ts wavelength and frequency:
Be careful not to confuse the symbols for the speed, v (lowercase standard letter v), with the frequency, (l owercase Greek
nu).
Different types of waves may have vastly different po ssible speeds and frequencies. Water waves are slow com pared to sound
waves, which can travel through solids, liquids, and g ases. Whereas water waves may travel a few meters per secon d, the speed of
sound in dry air at 20°C is 343.5 m/s. Ultrasonic waves, which travel at an even higher speed (>1500 m/s) and have a greater
frequency, are used in such diverse applications as loca ting underwater objects and the medical imaging of internal organs.
Electromagnetic Radiation
Water waves transmit energy through space by the perio dic oscillation of matter (the water). In contrast, en ergy that is transmitted,
or radiated, through space in the form of periodic oscillations of electric and magnetic fields is known a s electromagnetic
radiation. (Figure). Some forms of electromagnetic radiation a re shown in Figure. In a vacuum, all forms of
electromagnetic radiation—whether microwaves, visible l ight, or gamma rays—travel at the speed of light (c), which turns out to
be a fundamental physical constant with a value of 2.9 9792458 × 10 m/s (about 3.00 ×10 m/s or 1.86 × 10 mi /s). This is about a
million times faster than the speed of sound.
Figure: The Nature of Electromagnetic Radiation. Al l forms of electromagnetic radiation consist of perpen dicular oscillating
electric and magnetic fields.
Because the various kinds of electromagnetic radiati on all have the same speed (c), they differ in only wavelength and frequency.
As shown in Figure and Table, the wavelengths of famili ar electromagnetic radiation range from 10 m for ra dio
waves to 10 m for gamma rays, which are emitted by nu clear reactions. By replacing with \(c\) in Equation, we can
show that the frequency of electromagnetic radiation is i nversely proportional to its wavelength:−1
8 8 5
−12

5.1.1.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170003For example, the frequency of radio waves is about 10 Hz, whereas the frequency of gamma rays is about 10 Hz. Visible light,
which is electromagnetic radiation that can be detec ted by the human eye, has wavelengths between about 7 × 10 m (700 nm, or
4.3 × 10 Hz) and 4 × 10 m (400 nm, or 7.5 × 10 Hz). Not e that when frequency increases, wavelength decreases; c being a
constant stays the same. Similarly, when frequency decreas es, the wavelength increases.
Figure: The Electromagnetic Spectrum. (a) This diagra m shows the wavelength and frequency ranges of electro magnetic
radiation. The visible portion of the electromagneti c spectrum is the narrow region with wavelengths betwe en about 400 and 700
nm. (b) When white light is passed through a prism, it is split into light of different wavelengths, whose col ors correspond to the
visible spectrum.
Within the visible range our eyes perceive radiation of different wavelengths (or frequencies) as light of different colors, ranging
from red to violet in order of decreasing wavelength. The components of white light—a mixture of all the f requencies of visible
light—can be separated by a prism, as shown in part (b) in Figure. A similar phenomenon creates a rainbow, where water
droplets suspended in the air act as tiny prisms.
Table: Common Wavelength Units for Electromagnetic Radiation
Unit Symbol Wavelength (m) Type of Radiation
picometer pm 10 gamma ray
angstrom Å 10 x-ray
nanometer nm 10 UV, visible
micrometer μm 10 infrared
millimeter mm 10 infrared
centimeter cm 10 microwave
meter m 10 radio
As you will soon see, the energy of electromagnetic radi ation is directly proportional to its frequency and i nversely proportional to
its wavelength:
Whereas visible light is essentially harmless to our skin, ultraviolet light, with wavelengths of ≤ 400 nm, h as enough energy to
cause severe damage to our skin in the form of sunburn. Because the ozone layer of the atmosphere absorbs s unlight with
wavelengths less than 350 nm, it protects us from the dam aging effects of highly energetic ultraviolet radiatio n.
The energy of electromagnetic radiation increases with increasing frequency and
decreasing wavelength.8 20
−7
14 −7 14
−12
−10
−9
−6
−3
−2

5.1.1.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170003Your favorite FM radio station, WXYZ, broadcasts at a freque ncy of 101.1 MHz. What is the wavelength of this radiation?
Given: frequency
Asked for: wavelength
Strategy:
Substitute the value for the speed of light in meters per s econd into Equation to calculate the wavelength in mete rs.
Solution:
From Equation, we know that the product of the wavelen gth and the frequency is the speed of the wave, which f or
electromagnetic radiation is 2.998 × 10 m/s:
Thus the wavelength is given by
As the police officer was writing up your speeding tick et, she mentioned that she was using a state-of-the-ar t radar gun
operating at 35.5 GHz. What is the wavelength of the radiatio n emitted by the radar gun?
Answer
8.45 mm
Summary
Understanding the electronic structure of atoms requi res an understanding of the properties of waves and electromagnetic radiation.
A wave is a periodic oscillation by which energy is transmi tted through space. All waves are periodic, repeating regularly in both
space and time. Waves are characterized by several i nterrelated properties: wavelength (), the distance between successive waves;
frequency (), the number of waves that pass a fixed point per u nit time; speed (v), the rate at which the wave propagates through
space; and amplitude, the magnitude of the oscillation about the mean p osition. The speed of a wave is equal to the product o f its
wavelength and frequency. Electromagnetic radiation consists of two perpendicular waves, one electric and one magnetic,
propagating at the speed of light (). Electromagnetic radiation is radiant energy tha t includes radio waves, microwaves, visible
light, x-rays, and gamma rays, which differ in their frequen cies and wavelengths.
Contributors and Attributions
Modified by Joshua Halpern(opens in new window) (Howard University(opens in new window))
5.1.1: The Wave Nature of Light is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.Example: Wavelength of Radiowaves
Exercise

5.1.2.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1700045.1.2: The Particle Nature of Light
To understand how energy is quantized.
By the late 19th century, many physicists thought thei r discipline was well on the way to explaining most natur al phenomena. They
could calculate the motions of material objects using Newton’s laws of classical mechanics, and they could de scribe the properties
of radiant energy using mathematical relationships known as Maxwell’s equations, developed in 1873 by James Clerk Maxwell, a
Scottish physicist. The universe appeared to be a sim ple and orderly place, containing matter, which consiste d of particles that had
mass and whose location and motion could be accuratel y described, and electromagnetic radiation, which was vi ewed as having no
mass and whose exact position in space could not be fix ed. Thus matter and energy were considered distinct and unrelated
phenomena. Soon, however, scientists began to look more c losely at a few inconvenient phenomena that could not be explained by
the theories available at the time.
Blackbody Radiation
One phenomenon that seemed to contradict the theorie s of classical physics was blackbody radiation, which i s electromagnetic
radiation given off by a hot object. The wavelength (i.e. color) of radiant energy emitted by a blackbod y depends on only its
temperature, not its surface or composition. Hence an electric stove burner or the filament of a space he ater glows dull red or
orange when heated, whereas the much hotter tungsten wire in an incandescent light bulb gives off a yellowish light.
Figure: Blackbody Radiation. When heated, all objec ts emit electromagnetic radiation whose wavelength (a nd color)
depends on the temperature of the object. A relative ly low-temperature object, such as a horseshoe forged b y a blacksmith, appears
red, whereas a higher-temperature object, such as the surface of the sun, appears yellow or white. Images used with permission
from Wikipedia.
The intensity of radiation is a measure of the energy emitted per unit area. A plot of the intensity of blackbody ra diation as a
function of wavelength for an object at various tempe ratures is shown in Figure. One of the major assumption s of classical
physics was that energy increased or decreased in a sm ooth, continuous manner. For example, classical physics predicted that as
wavelength decreased, the intensity of the radiation an object emits should increase in a smooth curve with out limit at all
temperatures, as shown by the broken line for 6000 K in Figure. Thus classical physics could not explain th e sharp decrease
in the intensity of radiation emitted at shorter wav elengths (primarily in the ultraviolet region of th e spectrum), which was referred
to as the “ultraviolet catastrophe.” In 1900, however, the German physicist Max Planck (1858–1947) explained the ultraviolet
catastrophe by proposing (in what he called "an act o f despair") that the energy of electromagnetic waves is quantized rather than
continuous. This means that for each temperature, th ere is a maximum intensity of radiation that is emitt ed in a blackbody object,Learning Objectives

5.1.2.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170004corresponding to the peaks in Figure, so the intensi ty does not follow a smooth curve as the temperature increases, as
predicted by classical physics. Thus energy could be gained or lost only in integral multiples of some smallest unit of energy, a
quantum.
Figure: Relationship between the Temperature of an O bject and the Spectrum of Blackbody Radiation it Emi ts. At relatively
low temperatures, most radiation is emitted at wavelen gths longer than 700 nm, which is in the infrared por tion of the spectrum.
The dull red glow of the electric stove element in Fi gure is due to the small amount of radiation emitted at wavelengths less
than 700 nm, which the eye can detect. As the temper ature of the object increases, the maximum intensity sh ifts to shorter
wavelengths, successively resulting in orange, yellow, a nd finally white light. At high temperatures, all wa velengths of visible light
are emitted with approximately equal intensities. The white light spectrum shown for an object at 6000 K c losely approximates the
spectrum of light emitted by the sun (Figure). Note t he sharp decrease in the intensity of radiation emitte d at wavelengths
below 400 nm, which constituted the ultraviolet cata strophe. The classical prediction fails to fit the expe rimental curves entirely
and does not have a maximum intensity.
In addition to being a physicist, Planck was a gifted pianist, who at one time considered music as a career. During the 1930s,
Planck felt it was his duty to remain in Germany, despite hi s open opposition to the policies of the Nazi government.
One of his sons was executed in 1944 for his part in an unsuccessful attempt to assassinate Hitler, and bombin g during the last
weeks of World War II destroyed Planck’s home. After WW II, the major German scientific research organization was renamed
the Max Planck Society(opens in new window).
Although quantization may seem to be an unfamiliar c oncept, we encounter it frequently. For example, US money is integral
multiples of pennies. Similarly, musical instruments like a piano or a trumpet can produce only certain musical notes, such as C or
F sharp. Because these instruments cannot produce a c ontinuous range of frequencies, their frequencies are quantized. Even
electrical charge is quantized: an ion may have a char ge of −1 or −2 but not −1.33 electron charges.
Planck postulated that the energy of a particular quant um of radiant energy could be described by the equationMax Planck (1858–1947)

5.1.2.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170004where the proportionality constant h is called Planck’s constant, one of the most accuratel y known fundamental constants in
science. For our purposes, its value to four significant fig ures is generally sufficient:
As the frequency of electromagnetic radiation increas es, the magnitude of the associated quantum of radi ant energy increases. By
assuming that energy can be emitted by an object on ly in integral multiples of hν, Planck devised an equation that fit the
experimental data shown in Figure. We can understand Planck’s explanation of the ultraviolet catastrophe qualitatively as
follows: At low temperatures, radiation with only relat ively low frequencies is emitted, corresponding to low- energy quanta. As the
temperature of an object increases, there is an inc reased probability of emitting radiation with higher frequencies, corresponding to
higher-energy quanta. At any temperature, however, it is simply more probable for an object to lose energ y by emitting a large
number of lower-energy quanta than a single very hig h-energy quantum that corresponds to ultraviolet rad iation. The result is a
maximum in the plot of intensity of emitted radiati on versus wavelength, as shown in Figure, and a shift i n the position of
the maximum to lower wavelength (higher frequency) with increasing temperature.
At the time he proposed his radical hypothesis, Planck could not explain why energies should be quantized. Initially, his hypothe sis
explained only one set of experimental data—blackbo dy radiation. If quantization were observed for a lar ge number of different
phenomena, then quantization would become a law. In ti me, a theory might be developed to explain that law. As things turned out,
Planck’s hypothesis was the seed from which modern physics grew.
The Photoelectric Effect
Only five years after he proposed it, Planck’s quantiza tion hypothesis was used to explain a second phenomen on that conflicted
with the accepted laws of classical physics. When certa in metals are exposed to light, electrons are ejecte d from their surface
(Figure). Classical physics predicted that the numbe r of electrons emitted and their kinetic energy sho uld depend on only the
intensity of the light, not its frequency. In fact, h owever, each metal was found to have a characteristic threshold frequency of light;
below that frequency, no electrons are emitted regar dless of the light’s intensity. Above the threshold f requency, the number of
electrons emitted was found to be proportional to the intensity of the light, and their kinetic energy was proportional to the
frequency. This phenomenon was called the photoelectr ic effect (A phenomenon in which electrons are ejected from the surface of
a metal that has been exposed to light).
Figure: The Photoelectric Effect (a) Irradiating a m etal surface with photons of sufficiently high energy causes electrons to
be ejected from the metal. (b) A photocell that uses the photoelectric effect, similar to those found in a utomatic door openers. When
light strikes the metal cathode, electrons are emitted and attracted to the anode, resulting in a flow of electrical current. If the
incoming light is interrupted by, for example, a passi ng person, the current drops to zero. (c) In contrast to predictions using
classical physics, no electrons are emitted when photons of light with energy less than, such as red light, stri ke the cathode. The
energy of violet light is above the threshold frequen cy, so the number of emitted photons is proportional t o the light’s intensity.
Albert Einstein (1879–1955; Nobel Prize in Physics, 1921) quickly realized that Planck’s hypothesis about the quantization of
radiant energy could also explain the photoelectric effect. The key feature of Einstein’s hypothesis was t he assumption that radiant
energy arrives at the metal surface in particles th at we now call photons (a quantum of radiant energy, each of which possesses a
particular energy energy given by Equation Einste in postulated that each metal has a particular elec trostatic attraction for
its electrons that must be overcome before an electro n can be emitted from its surface (). If photons of l ight with energy

5.1.2.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170004less than E strike a metal surface, no single photon has enough energy to eject an electron, so no electrons are emi tted regardless
of the intensity of the light. If a photon with energ y greater than E strikes the metal, then part of its energy is used t o overcome the
forces that hold the electron to the metal surface, and th e excess energy appears as the kinetic energy of the ejecte d electron:
When a metal is struck by light with energy above th e threshold energy E, the number of emitted electrons is proportional to the
intensity of the light beam, which corresponds to the number of photons per square centimeter, but the kinetic energy of the emitted
electrons is proportional to the frequency of the light. Thus Einstein showed that the energy of the emitted electrons depended on
the frequency of the light, contrary to the predicti on of classical physics. Moreover, the idea that light could behave not only as a
wave but as a particle in the form of photons suggested that m atter and energy might not be such unrelated phenomena a fter all.
Figure: A Beam of Red Light Emitted by a Helium Neon laser reads a bar code. Originally Helium neon lasers, which emit
red light at a wavelength of 632.8 nm, were used to read bar codes. Today, smaller, inexpensive diode laser s are used.
In 1900, Einstein was working in the Swiss patent office in Bern. He was born in Germany and throughout his chil dhood his
parents and teachers had worried that he might be de velopmentally disabled. The patent office job was a lo w-level civil service
position that was not very demanding, but it did all ow Einstein to spend a great deal of time reading and thinking about
physics.
In 1905, his "miracle year" he published four paper s that revolutionized physics. One was on the special t heory of relativity, a
second on the equivalence of mass and energy, a third on Brownian motion, and the fourth on the photoelec tric effect, for
which he received the Nobel Prize in 1921, the theory of relativity and energy-matter equivalence being s till controversial at
the time
Planck’s and Einstein’s postulate that energy is quant ized is in many ways similar to Dalton’s description of atoms. Both theories
are based on the existence of simple building block s, atoms in one case and quanta of energy in the othe r. The work of Planck and
Einstein thus suggested a connection between the quant ized nature of energy and the properties of individual a toms.o
o
o
Albert Einstein (1879–1955)

5.1.2.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170004A ruby laser, a device that produces light in a narro w range of wavelengths emits red light at a wavelength of 694.3 nm (Figure
). What is the energy in joules of a single photon?
Given: wavelength
Asked for: energy of single photon.
Strategy:
A. Use Equation and the relationship between wavelength an d frequency to calculate the energy in joules.
Solution:
The energy of a single photon is given by
An x-ray generator, such as those used in hospitals, emits radiation with a wavelength of 1.544 Å.
a. What is the energy in joules of a single photon?
b. How many times more energetic is a single x-ray photon of t his wavelength than a photon emitted by a ruby laser?
Answer a
Answer b
4497 times
External Videos and Examples
Calculating Energy of a Mole of Photons - Johnny Cantrell
.Photons - ViaScience, an advanced explanation of the Planck radia tion law and the photoelectric effect (below) as well as
biological interactions with UV light.and the nature of li ght and quantum weirdness. Probably the first 6 minutes and t he last 3
(from 12:00 on) as an introduction to wave particle duality.a re useful to a beginning student.
Quantum Chemistry - Ohio State
Quantum Chemistry Quizzes - mhe education
AP Chemistry Chapter 7 Review - Science Geek
Quantum Theory of the Atom Practice Quiz - Northrup
Summary
The fundamental building blocks of energy are quant a and of matter are atoms. The properties of blackbody radiation, the
radiation emitted by hot objects, could not be expl ained with classical physics. Max Planck postulated that energy was quantized
and could be emitted or absorbed only in integral mu ltiples of a small unit of energy, known as a quantum. The energy of a
quantum is proportional to the frequency of the rad iation; the proportionality constant is a fundamenta l constant (Planck’s
constant). Albert Einstein used Planck’s concept of th e quantization of energy to explain the photoelectric effect, the ejection of
electrons from certain metals when exposed to light. E instein postulated the existence of what today we call photons, particles of
light with a particular energy,. Both energy and matter have fundamental building blocks: quanta and atoms, re spectively.
Contributors and Attributions
Modified by Joshua Halpern (Howard University)
5.1.2: The Particle Nature of Light is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.Example
Exercise

5.1.3.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1700055.1.3: Atomic Emission Spectra and the Bohr Model
To know the relationship between atomic emission spectra and the electronic structure of atoms.
The concept of the photon emerged from experimentat ion with thermal radiation, electromagnetic radiation emitted as the result o f
a source’s temperature, which produces a continuous sp ectrum of energies.The photoelectric effect provide d indisputable evidence
for the existence of the photon and thus the partic le-like behavior of electromagnetic radiation. However, more direct evidence was
needed to verify the quantized nature of energy in all matter. In this section, we describe how observation of the interaction of
atoms with visible light provided this evidence.
Atomic Emission Spectra
Although objects at high temperature emit a continuou s spectrum of electromagnetic radiation, a different kind of spectrum is
observed when pure samples of individual elements are heated. For example, when a high-voltage electrical discharge is passed
through a sample of hydrogen gas at low pressure, the r esulting individual isolated hydrogen atoms caused by the dissociation of
H emit a red light. Unlike blackbody radiation, the c olor of the light emitted by the hydrogen atoms doe s not depend greatly on the
temperature of the gas in the tube. When the emitted light is passed through a prism, only a few narrow lin es of particular
wavelengths, called a line spectrum, are observed rath er than a continuous range of wavelengths (Figure). T he light emitted
by hydrogen atoms is red because, of its four charact eristic lines, the most intense line in its spectrum i s in the red portion of the
visible spectrum, at 656 nm.
Figure: The Emission of Light by Hydrogen Atoms. (a) A sampl e of excited hydrogen atoms emits a characteristic red/pink
light. (b) When the light emitted by a sample of excited hydrogen atoms is split into its component wavelengths by a p rism, four
characteristic violet, blue, green, and red emission li nes can be observed, the most intense of which is at 656 nm.
The familiar red color of neon signs used in advertis ing is due to the emission spectrum of neon. Similarl y, the blue and yellow
colors of certain street lights are caused, respectivel y, by mercury and sodium discharges. In all these cas es, an electrical discharge
excites neutral atoms to a higher energy state, and light is emitted when the atoms decay to the ground s tate. In the case of mercury,
most of the emission lines are below 450 nm, which prod uces a blue light. In the case of sodium, the most in tense emission lines
are at 589 nm, which produces an intense yellow light.Learning Objectives

5.1.3.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170005
Figure: The emission spectra of sodium and mercury. Sodium and me rcury spectra. Many street lights use bulbs that contain
sodium or mercury vapor. Due to the very different emissi on spectra of these elements, they emit light of differ ent colors. The lines
in the sodium lamp are broadened by collisions. The dark line in the center of the high pressure sodium lamp wh ere the low
pressure lamp is strongest is cause by absorption of light i n the cooler outer part of the lamp.
Such emission spectra were observed for many elements in the late 19th ce ntury, which presented a major challenge because
classical physics was unable to explain them. Part of th e explanation is provided by Planck’s equation: the o bservation of only a
few values of λ (or) in the line spectrum meant that only a few values of E were possible. Thus the energy levels of a hydrogen
atom had to be quantized; in other words, only states that had certain values o f energy were possible, or allowed. If a hydrogen
atom could have any value of energy, then a continuous spectrum would have be en observed, similar to blackbody radiation.
The Empirical Hydrogen Equations
In 1885, a Swiss mathematics teacher, Johann Balmer (182 5–1898), showed that the frequencies of the lines obser ved in the visible
region of the spectrum of hydrogen fit a simple equ ation. The Swedish physicist Johannes Rydberg (1854–1 919) subsequently
restated and expanded Balmer’s result in the Rydberg equation:
where and are positive integers,, and the Rydberg constant, has a value of 1.09737 × 10 m and Z is the atomic
number. The Rydberg equation can be rewritten in terms of t he photon energy as follows:
where and are positive integers,, and is the Rydberg constant expressed in terms of energy has a value of 2.180 ×
10 J (or 1313 kJ/mol) and Z is the atomic number.
The so-called Lyman series of lines in the emission spectrum of h ydrogen corresponds to transitions from various excited state s
to the n = 1 orbit. Calculate the photon energy of the lowest- energy emission in the Lyman series. In what region of the
electromagnetic spectrum does it occur?
Given: lowest-energy orbit in the Lyman series
Asked for: energy of the lowest-energy Lyman emission and correspon ding region of the spectrum
Strategy:
A. Substitute the appropriate values into the Rydberg equat ion and solve for the photon energy.
B. Convert E to and look at an electromagnetic spect rum. Find the location corresponding to the calculated wav elength.7 −1
-18
Example: The Hydrogen Lyman Series

5.1.3.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170005Solution:
We can use the Rydberg equation to calculate the wavele ngth:
A For the Lyman series, n = 1. The lowest-energy line is due to a transition f rom the n = 2 to n = 1 orbit because they are the
closest in energy. The atomic number of hydrogen is 1, s o Z=1.
B Frequency is directly proportional to energy as sho wn by Planck's formula,. Wavelength is inversely prop ortional to
frequency as shown by the formula,. Using these equat ions, we can express wavelength, in terms of photon ene rgy, E,
as follows:
Referring to the electromagnetic spectrum, we see that thi s wavelength is in the ultraviolet region.
This emission line is called Lyman alpha. It is the st rongest atomic emission line from the sun and drives the chemistry of the
upper atmosphere of all the planets, producing ions b y stripping electrons from atoms and molecules. It i s completely absorbed
by oxygen in the upper stratosphere, dissociating O mo lecules to O atoms which react with other O molecules to form
stratospheric ozone.
The Pfund series of lines in the emission spectrum of hydrogen corresponds to transitions from higher exci ted states to the n =
5 orbit. Calculate the wavelength of the second line in the Pfund series to three significant figur es. In which region of the
spectrum does it lie?
Answer
4.65 × 10 nm; infrared
Like Balmer’s equation, Rydberg’s simple equation des cribed the wavelengths of the visible lines in the e mission spectrum of
hydrogen (with n = 2, n = 3, 4, 5,…). More important, Rydberg’s equation al so predicted the wavelengths of other series of lines
that would be observed in the emission spectrum of hyd rogen: one in the ultraviolet (n = 1, n = 2, 3, 4,…) and one in the infrared
(n = 3, n = 4, 5, 6). Unfortunately, scientists had not yet developed any theoretical justification for an equation of this f orm.
The Bohr Model for Hydrogen (and other one-electron systems)
In 1913, a Danish physicist, Niels Bohr (1885–1962; Nobe l Prize in Physics, 1922), proposed a theoretical model for the hydrogen
atom that explained its emission spectrum. Bohr’s mode l required only one assumption: The electron moves around the nucleus in
circular orbits that can have only certain allowed r adii. Rutherford’s earlier model of the atom had also as sumed that electrons
moved in circular orbits around the nucleus and tha t the atom was held together by the electrostatic att raction between the
positively charged nucleus and the negatively charg ed electron. Although we now know that the assumption o f circular orbits was
incorrect, Bohr’s insight was to propose that the electron could occupy only certain regions of spac e.
Using classical physics, Niels Bohr showed that the energy of an electron in a particular orbit is given by1
2 2
Exercise: The Pfund Series
1 2
1 2
1 2

5.1.3.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170005where is the Rydberg constant in terms of energy, Z is the atom is the atomic number, and n is a positive integer corresponding
to the number assigned to the orbit, with n = 1 corresponding to the orbit closest to the nucleus. In this model n = ∞ corresponds to
the level where the energy holding the electron and the nucleus together is zero. In that level, the el ectron is unbound from the
nucleus and the atom has been separated into a negati vely charged (the electron) and a positively charged (the nucleus) ion. In this
state the radius of the orbit is also infinite. The atom h as been ionized.
Figure: The Bohr Model of the Hydrogen Atom (a) The distance of the orbit from the nucleus increases with increasing n. (b)
The energy of the orbit becomes increasingly less negativ e with increasing n.
As n decreases, the energy holding the electron and th e nucleus together becomes increasingly negative, the radius of the orbit
shrinks and more energy is needed to ionize the ato m. The orbit with n = 1 is the lowest lying and most t ightly bound. The negative
sign in Equation indicates that the electron-nucle us pair is more tightly bound (i.e. at a lower potent ial energy) when they are
near each other than when they are far apart. Because a hydrogen atom with its one electron in this orbit has the lowest possible
energy, this is the ground state (the most stable arrangement of electrons for an el ement or a compound) for a hydrogen atom. As n
increases, the radius of the orbit increases; the elec tron is farther from the proton, which results in a le ss stable arrangement with
higher potential energy (Figure). A hydrogen atom wi th an electron in an orbit with n > 1 is therefore in an excited state,
defined as any arrangement of electrons that is high er in energy than the ground state. When an atom in an excited state undergoes
a transition to the ground state in a process called decay, it loses energy by emitting a photon whose en ergy corresponds to the
difference in energy between the two states (Figure).
Figure: The Emission of Light by a Hydrogen Atom in an Excit ed State. (a) Light is emitted when the electron unde rgoes a
transition from an orbit with a higher value of n (at a higher energy) to an orbit with a lower value of n (a t lower energy). (b) The
Balmer series of emission lines is due to transitions from orbi ts with n ≥ 3 to the orbit with n = 2. The differences in energy between
these levels corresponds to light in the visible portion o f the electromagnetic spectrum.

5.1.3.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170005So the difference in energy (Δ E) between any two orbits or energy levels is given by where n is the final
orbit and n is the initial orbit. Substituting from Bohr’s energy equation (Equation 7.3.3) for each energy value gives
If we distribute the negative sign, the equation simplifie s to
If n > n, then the transition is from a higher energy state (larger-radius orbit) to a lower energy state (smaller -radius orbit),
as shown by the dashed arrow in part (a) in Figure and ΔE will be a negative value, reflecting the decrease in electron
energy. Note that this is essentially the same equati on 7.3.2 that Rydberg obtained experimentally. Bohr c alculated the value of
from fundamental constants such as the charge and m ass of the electron and Planck's constant and obtaine d a value of 2.180 × 10
J, the same number Rydberg had obtained by analyzin g the emission spectra. The only significant differenc e between Bohr's
theoretically derived equation and Rydberg's experim entally derived equation is a matter of sign. Rydberg 's equation always results
in a positive value (which is good since photon ener gies are always positive quantities!!), whereas Bohr's equation can be either
negative (the electron is decreasing in energy) or p ositive (the electron is increasing in energy). Regar dless, the energy of the
emitted photon corresponds to the change in energy of the electron.
We can now understand the theoretical basis for the em ission spectrum of hydrogen (); the lines in the visi ble series of
emissions (the Balmer series) correspond to transitions from higher-energy orbits (n > 2) to the second orb it (n = 2). Thus the
hydrogen atoms in the sample have absorbed energy fro m the electrical discharge and decayed from a higher -energy excited state
(n > 2) to a lower-energy state (n = 2) by emitting a photon of electromagnetic radiation whose energy co rresponds exactly to the
difference in energy between the two states (Figure). The n = 3 to n = 2 transition gives rise to the lin e at 656 nm (red), the
n = 4 to n = 2 transition to the line at 486 nm (gr een), the n = 5 to n = 2 transition to the line at 4 34 nm (blue), and the n = 6 to n = 2
transition to the line at 410 nm (violet). Because a sa mple of hydrogen contains a large number of atoms, th e intensity of the
various lines in a line spectrum depends on the numb er of atoms in each excited state. At the temperature in the gas discharge tube,
more atoms are in the n = 3 than the n ≥ 4 levels. Co nsequently, the n = 3 to n = 2 transition is the mos t intense line, producing the
characteristic red color of a hydrogen discharge (Fi gure). Other families of lines are produced by trans itions from excited
states with n > 1 to the orbit with n = 1 or to orbits with n ≥ 3. These transitions are shown schematically in Figu re final
initial
initial final
electron

-18

5.1.3.6 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170005
File:A_hidrogen_szinkepei.jpg
File:Hydrogen_transitions.svg
Figure: Electron Transitions Responsible for the
Various Series of Lines Observed in the Emission Spectrum of H ydrogen. The Lyman series of lines is due to transitions fr om
higher-energy orbits to the lowest-energy orbit (n = 1); these transitions release a great deal of energy, corresp onding to radiation
in the ultraviolet portion of the electromagnetic spec trum. The Paschen, Brackett, and Pfund series of lines are due to transitions
from higher-energy orbits to orbits with n = 3, 4, and 5, respectively; these transitions release substantially le ss energy,
corresponding to infrared radiation. The Backett and Pf und series not shown. (Energy levels are not to scale.)
In contemporary applications, electron transitions a re used in timekeeping that needs to be exact. Tele communications systems,
such as cell phones, depend on timing signals that are accurate to within a millionth of a second per da y, as are the devices that
control the US power grid. Global positioning system (GPS) si gnals must be accurate to within a billionth of a sec ond per day,
which is equivalent to gaining or losing no more than one second in 1,400,000 years. Quantifying time requ ires finding an
event with an interval that repeats on a regular basis.
To achieve the accuracy required for modern purpose s, physicists have turned to the atom. The current sta ndard used to
calibrate clocks is the cesium atom. Supercooled cesi um atoms are placed in a vacuum chamber and bombard ed with
microwaves whose frequencies are carefully controlled. W hen the frequency is exactly right, the atoms absorb enough energy
to undergo an electronic transition to a higher-ene rgy state. Decay to a lower-energy state emits radiati on. The microwave
frequency is continually adjusted, serving as the clock’ s pendulum.
In 1967, the second was defined as the duration of 9,1 92,631,770 oscillations of the resonant frequency of a cesium atom,
called the cesium clock. Research is currently under way to develop the nex t generation of atomic clocks that promise to be
even more accurate. Such devices would allow scientists to monitor vanishingly faint electromagnetic signa ls produced by
nerve pathways in the brain and geologists to measure variations in gravitational fields, which cause fluctu ations in time, that
would aid in the discovery of oil or minerals.
Bohr’s model of the hydrogen atom gave an exact exp lanation for its observed emission spectrum. The foll owing are his key
contributions to our understanding of atomic structure:
Electrons can exists at only certain distances from the n ucleus, called orbits.
Orbits closer to the nucleus are lower in energy.
Electrons can move from one orbit to another by absorb ing or emitting energy, giving rise to characteristic s pectra.
Unfortunately, Bohr could not explain why the electron should be restricted to particular or bits. Also, despite a great deal of
tinkering, such as assuming that orbits could be ellip ses rather than circles, his model could not quantitat ively explain the emission
spectra of any element other than hydrogen (Figure). In fact, Bohr’s model worked only for species that c ontained just one
electron: H, He, Li, and so forth. Scientists needed a fund amental change in their way of thinking about the el ectronic structure
of atoms to advance beyond the Bohr model.Using Atoms to Time
+ 2+

5.1.3.7 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170005Absorption Spectra
Thus far we have explicitly considered only the emiss ion of light by atoms in excited states, which produc es an emission spectrum.
The converse, absorption of light by ground-state ato ms to produce an excited state, can also occur, produ cing an absorption
spectrum.
When an atom emits light, it decays to a lower energy s tate; when an atom absorbs light, it is excited to a higher energy state.
If white light is passed through a sample of hydrogen, hydrogen atoms absorb energy as an electron is excit ed to higher energy
levels (orbits with n ≥ 2). If the light that emerges is passed through a prism, it forms a continuous spectrum with black lines
(corresponding to no light passing through the sample) at 656, 468, 434, and 410 nm. These wavelengths corr espond to the n = 2 to
n = 3, n = 2 to n = 4, n = 2 to n = 5, and n = 2 to n = 6 transitions. Any given element therefore has bo th a characteristic emission
spectrum and a characteristic absorption spectrum, which are essentially complementary images.
Figure: Absorption and Emission Spectra. Absorption of light by a hydrogen atom. (a) When a hydrogen atom absorbs a
photon of light, an electron is excited to an orbit that has a higher energy and larger value of n. (b) Images of the emission and
absorption spectra of hydrogen are shown here. Note th at these images also include a 5th line, appearing slig htly below 400 nm.
This line corresponds to electron transitions between n = 2 and n = 7 and exceeds the commonly visible range of light.
Emission and absorption spectra form the basis of spectroscopy, which uses spectra to provide information about th e structure and
the composition of a substance or an object. In part icular, astronomers use emission and absorption spectra to determine the
composition of stars and interstellar matter. As an exam ple, consider the spectrum of sunlight shown in Figure Because the
sun is very hot, the light it emits is in the form of a continuous emission spectrum. Superimposed on it, however, is a series of dark
lines due primarily to the absorption of specific f requencies of light by cooler atoms in the outer atm osphere of the sun. By
comparing these lines with the spectra of elements mea sured on Earth, we now know that the sun contains large a mounts of
hydrogen, iron, and carbon, along with smaller amounts o f other elements. During the solar eclipse of 1868, th e French astronomer
Pierre Janssen (1824–1907) observed a set of lines th at did not match those of any known element. He suggeste d that they were due
to the presence of a new element, which he named helium, from the Greek helios, meaning “sun.” Helium was finally discovered in
uranium ores on Earth in 1895. Alpha particles are he lium nuclei. Alpha particles emitted by the radioactiv e uranium pick up
electrons from the rocks to form helium atoms.

5.1.3.8 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170005
Figure: The Visible Spectrum of Sunlight. The characteristic da rk lines are mostly due to the absorption of light by el ements
that are present in the cooler outer part of the sun’ s at mosphere; specific elements are indicated by the label s. The lines at 628 and
687 nm, however, are due to the absorption of light b y oxygen molecules in Earth’ s atmosphere.
Summary
There is an intimate connection between the atomic st ructure of an atom and its spectral characteristics. At oms of individual
elements emit light at only specific wavelengths, pro ducing a line spectrum rather than the continuous spectrum of all wavelengt hs
produced by a hot object. Niels Bohr explained the l ine spectrum of the hydrogen atom by assuming that t he electron moved in
circular orbits and that orbits with only certain ra dii were allowed. Lines in the spectrum were due to tr ansitions in which an
electron moved from a higher-energy orbit with a larg er radius to a lower-energy orbit with smaller radius. The orbit closest to the
nucleus represented the ground state of the atom and was most stable; orbits farther away we re higher-energy excited states.
Transitions from an excited state to a lower-energy st ate resulted in the emission of light with only a lim ited number of
wavelengths. Atoms can also absorb light of certain ener gies, resulting in a transition from the ground state or a lower-energy
excited state to a higher-energy excited state. This produces an absorption spectrum, which has dark lines in the same position as
the bright lines in the emission spectrum of an element. Bohr’s model revolutionized the unde rstanding of the atom but could not
explain the spectra of atoms heavier than hydrogen.
Contributors and Attributions
Modified by Joshua Halpern (Howard University)
5.1.3: Atomic Emission Spectra and the Bohr Model is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
LibreTexts.

5.1.4.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1700065.1.4: The Wave Behavior of Matter
To understand the wave–particle duality of matter.
Einstein’s photons of light were individual packets of energy having many of the characteristics of parti cles. Recall that the
collision of an electron (a particle) with a sufficie ntly energetic photon can eject a photoelectron from the surface of a metal. Any
excess energy is transferred to the electron and is c onverted to the kinetic energy of the ejected elect ron. Einstein’s hypothesis that
energy is concentrated in localized bundles, however, was in sharp contrast to the classical notion that e nergy is spread out
uniformly in a wave. We now describe Einstein’s theory of the relationship between energy and mass, a theor y that others built on
to develop our current model of the atom.
The Wave Character of Matter
Einstein initially assumed that photons had zero mass, which made them a peculiar sort of particle indeed. In 1905, however, he
published his special theory of relativity, which related en ergy and mass according to the famous equation:
According to this theory, a photon of energy has a nonze ro mass, which can be solved for as follows:
That is, light, which had always been regarded as a wave, also has properties typical of particles, a conditio n known as wave–
particle duality (a principle that matter and energ y have properties typical of both waves and particle s). Depending on conditions,
light could be viewed as either a wave or a particle.
In 1922, the American physicist Arthur Compton (1892–1 962) reported the results of experiments involving the collision of x-rays
and electrons that supported the particle nature of light. At about the same time, a young French physic s student, Louis de Broglie
(1892–1972), began to wonder whether the converse was tr ue: Could particles exhibit the properties of waves? In his PhD
dissertation submitted to the Sorbonne in 1924, de Br oglie proposed that a particle such as an electron c ould be described by a
wave whose wavelength is given by
where
is Planck’s constant,
is the mass of the particle, and
v is the velocity of the particle.
This revolutionary idea was quickly confirmed by Americ an physicists Clinton Davisson (1881–1958) and Lester Germ er (1896–
1971), who showed that beams of electrons, regarded as particles, were diffracted by a sodium chloride cryst al in the same manner
as x-rays, which were regarded as waves. It was proven expe rimentally that electrons do exhibit the properties of waves. For his
work, de Broglie received the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1929.
If particles exhibit the properties of waves, why had no one observed them before? The answer lies in the numerator of de Broglie’s
equation, which is an extremely small number. As you wil l calculate in Example, Planck’s constant (6.63 × 10 J•s) is so
small that the wavelength of a particle with a large mass is too short (less than the diameter of an atomic nucleus) to be noticeable.Learning Objectives
−34

5.1.4.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170006Calculate the wavelength of a baseball, which has a mass of 149 g and a speed of 100 mi/h.
Given: mass and speed of object
Asked for: wavelength
Strategy:
A. Convert the speed of the baseball to the appropriate SI units: meters per second.
B. Substitute values into Equation and solve for the wavel ength.
Solution:
The wavelength of a particle is given by. We know th at m = 0.149 kg, so all we need to find is the speed of t he
baseball:
B Recall that the joule is a derived unit, whose units are (k g•m)/s. Thus the wavelength of the baseball is
(You should verify that the units cancel to give th e wavelength in meters.) Given that the diameter of the nucleus of an atom is
approximately 10 m, the wavelength of the baseball is alm ost unimaginably small.
Calculate the wavelength of a neutron that is moving at 3.0 0 × 10 m/s.
Answer
1.32 Å, or 132 pm
As you calculated in Example, objects such as a baseba ll or a neutron have such short wavelengths that they are best
regarded primarily as particles. In contrast, objects wi th very small masses (such as photons) have large wav elengths and can be
viewed primarily as waves. Objects with intermediate masse s, however, such as electrons, exhibit the properties of both particles
and waves. Although we still usually think of electrons as p articles, the wave nature of electrons is employed in an electron
microscope, which has revealed most of what we know about the mic roscopic structure of living organisms and materials. Because
the wavelength of an electron beam is much shorter th an the wavelength of a beam of visible light, this i nstrument can resolve
smaller details than a light microscope can (Figure).
Figure: A Comparison of Images Obtained Using a Light Microscope and an Electron Microscope. Because of thei r shorter
wavelength, high-energy electrons have a higher resol ving power than visible light. Consequently, an elect ron microscope (b) is
able to resolve finer details than a light microscope (a). (Radiolaria, which are shown here, are unicellu lar planktonic organisms.)Example: Wavelength of a Baseball in Motion
2 2
−14
Exercise: Wavelength of a Neutron in Motion

5.1.4.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170006The Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle
Because a wave is a disturbance that travels in space, i t has no fixed position. One might therefore expect th at it would also be hard
to specify the exact position of a particle that exhibits wavelike behavior. A characteristic of light is that is can be bent or spread
out by passing through a narrow slit. You can literall y see this by half closing your eyes and looking th rough your eye lashes. This
reduces the brightness of what you are seeing and so mewhat fuzzes out the image, but the light bends around your lashes to provide
a complete image rather than a bunch of bars across the ima ge. This is called diffraction.
This behavior of waves is captured in Maxwell's equations (1870 or so) for electromagnetic waves and was and i s well understood.
An "uncertainty principle" for light is, if you will, merely a conclusion about the nature of electromagn etic waves and nothing new.
De Broglie's idea of wave-particle duality means that particles such as electrons which exhibit wavelike char acteristics will also
undergo diffraction from slits whose size is on the order of the electron wavelength.
This situation was described mathematically by the Ger man physicist Werner Heisenberg (1901–1976; Nobel Priz e in Physics,
1932), who related the position of a particle to its momentum. Referring to the electron, Heisenberg stated that “at every moment
the electron has only an inaccurate position and an inaccurate velocity, and between these two inaccuraci es there is this uncertainty
relation.” Mathematically, the Heisenberg uncertainty principle states that the uncertainty in the position of a p article (Δ x)
multiplied by the uncertainty in its momentum [Δ(mv)] is greater than or equal to Planck’s constant divided by 4π:
Because Planck’s constant is a very small number, the Heisenberg uncertainty principle is important only f or particles such as
electrons that have very low masses. These are the same p articles predicted by de Broglie’s equation to have measurable
wavelengths.
If the precise position of a particle is known absolutely (Δx = 0), then the uncertainty in its momentum must be infi nite:
Because the mass of the electron at rest () is both c onstant and accurately known, the uncertainty in mu st be due to the
term, which would have to be infinitely large for to equal infinity. That is, according to Equation, th e more accurately
we know the exact position of the electron (as), the l ess accurately we know the speed and the kinetic ener gy of the
electron (1/2 mv) because. Conversely, the more accurately we know th e precise momentum (and the energy) of the
electron [as], then and we have no idea where the elect ron is.
Bohr’s model of the hydrogen atom violated the Heise nberg uncertainty principle by trying to specify simultaneously both the
position (an orbit of a particular radius) and the energy (a quantity related to the momentum) of the electron. Moreover, given its
mass and wavelike nature, the electron in the hydroge n atom could not possibly orbit the nucleus in a well -defined circular path as
predicted by Bohr. You will see, however, that the most probable radius of the electron in the hydrogen atom is exactly th e one
predicted by Bohr’s model.
Calculate the minimum uncertainty in the position o f the pitched baseball from Example that has a mas s of exactly 149
g and a speed of 100 ± 1 mi/h.
Given: mass and speed of object
Asked for: minimum uncertainty in its position
Strategy:
A. Rearrange the inequality that describes the Heisenberg un certainty principle (Equation) to solve for the minimum
uncertainty in the position of an object (Δ x).
B. Find Δ v by converting the velocity of the baseball to the appro priate SI units: meters per second.
C. Substitute the appropriate values into the expression for the inequality and solve for Δ x.
Solution:2
Example: Quantum Nature of Baseballs

5.1.4.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170006A The Heisenberg uncertainty principle (Equation) tells u s that
. Rearranging the inequality gives
B We know that h = 6.626 × 10 J•s and m = 0.149 kg. Because there is no uncertainty in the m ass of the baseball, Δ(mv) =
mΔv and Δ v = ±1 mi/h. We have
C Therefore,
Inserting the definition of a joule (1 J = 1 kg•m /s) giv es
This is equal to inches. We can safely say that if a batter misjudges the speed of a fastball by 1 mi/h (about 1%), he
will not be able to blame Heisenberg’s uncertainty princ iple for striking out.
Calculate the minimum uncertainty in the position o f an electron traveling at one-third the speed of l ight, if the uncertainty in
its speed is ±0.1%. Assume its mass to be equal to its mass a t rest.
Answer
6 × 10 m, or 0.6 nm (about the diameter of a benzene mole cule)
Standing Waves
De Broglie also investigated why only certain orbits were allowed in Bohr’s model of the hydrogen atom. He hypo thesized that the
electron behaves like a standing wave (a wave that does not travel in space). An example o f a standing wave is the motion of a
string of a violin or guitar. When the string is pl ucked, it vibrates at certain fixed frequencies becau se it is fastened at both ends
(Figure). If the length of the string is, then the lowest-e nergy vibration (the fundamental) has wavelength
Higher-energy vibrations are called overtones (the vibration of a standing wave that is higher in energy than the fundamental
vibration) and are produced when the string is plucked more strongly; they have wavelengths given by
where n has any integral value. When plucked, all othe r frequencies die out immediately. Only the resonant f requencies survive and
are heard. Thus, we can think of the resonant frequenci es of the string as being quantized. Notice in Figure that all overtones
have one or more nodes, points where the string does not mov e. The amplitude of the wave at a node is zero.−34
2 2
Exercise
−10

5.1.4.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170006
Figure: Standing Waves on a Vibrating String. The vib ration with \(n = 1\) is the fundamental and contains no nodes.
Vibrations with higher values of n are called overtones; they contain \(n − 1\) nodes.
Quantized vibrations and overtones containing nodes are not restricted to one-dimensional systems, such as strings. A twodimensional surface, such as a drumhead, also has quan tized vibrations. Similarly, when the ends of a string ar e joined to form a
circle, the only allowed vibrations are those with wavelength
where is the radius of the circle. De Broglie argued that Bohr’s allowed orbits could be understood if t he electron behaved like a
standing circular wave (Figure). The standing wave could exist only if the circumference of the circle was an integral
multiple of the wavelength such that the propagated waves were all in phase, thereby increasing the net amp litudes and causing
constructive interference. Otherwise, the propagated waves would be out of phase, r esulting in a net decrease in amplitude and
causing destructive interference. The nonresonant waves interfere with themselves! De Bro glie’s idea explained Bohr’s allowed
orbits and energy levels nicely: in the lowest energy level, corresponding to in Equation, one complete wavelength
would close the circle. Higher energy levels would have succe ssively higher values of n with a corresponding number of nodes.
Figure: Standing Circular Wave and Destructive Interfe rence. (a) In a standing circular wave with \(n = 5\), the
circumference of the circle corresponds to exactly fi ve wavelengths, which results in constructive interfere nce of the wave with
itself when overlapping occurs. (b) If the circumfere nce of the circle is not equal to an integral multip le of wavelengths, then the
wave does not overlap exactly with itself, and the re sulting destructive interference will result in cancel lation of the wave.
Consequently, a standing wave cannot exist under these conditions.
Like all analogies, although the standing wave model helps us understand much about why Bohr's theory worked, it also, if pushed
too far, can mislead. As you will see, some of de Brogli e’s ideas are retained in the modern theory of the electronic structure of the
atom: the wave behavior of the electron and the pres ence of nodes that increase in number as the energy level increases.
Unfortunately, his (and Bohr's) explanation also contai ns one major feature that we now know to be incorrect: in the currently
accepted model, the electron in a given orbit is not always at the same distance from the nucleus.

5.1.4.6 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170006Summary
An electron possesses both particle and wave properti es. The modern model for the electronic structure of t he atom is based on
recognizing that an electron possesses particle and wa ve properties, the so-called wave–particle duality. Louis de Broglie showed
that the wavelength of a particle is equal to Planck’s const ant divided by the mass times the velocity of the particl e.
Werner Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle states that it is impossible to precisely describe bot h the location and the speed of
particles that exhibit wavelike behavior.
The electron in Bohr’s circular orbits could thus be described as a standing wave, one that does not move through space. Standing
waves are familiar from music: the lowest-energy stand ing wave is the fundamental vibration, and higher-energy vibrations are
overtones and have successively more nodes, points where the amplitude of the wave is always zero.
5.1.4: The Wave Behavior of Matter is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

5.1.5.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1700075.1.5: Quantum Mechanics and Atomic Orbitals
To apply the results of quantum mechanics to chemistry.
The paradox described by Heisenberg’s uncertainty pri nciple and the wavelike nature of subatomic particle s such as the electron
made it impossible to use the equations of classical physics to describe the motion of electrons in atom s. Scientists needed a new
approach that took the wave behavior of the electron into account. In 1926, an Austrian physicist, Erwin Sc hrödinger (1887–1961;
Nobel Prize in Physics, 1933), developed wave mechanics, a mathematical technique that describes the relati onship between the
motion of a particle that exhibits wavelike properties (such as an electron) and its allowed energies.
Schrödinger’s unconventional approach to atomic theory was typical of his unconventional approach to life. He was notorious
for his intense dislike of memorizing data and learn ing from books. When Hitler came to power in Germany, Sc hrödinger
escaped to Italy. He then worked at Princeton University in the United States but eventually moved to the Insti tute for
Advanced Studies in Dublin, Ireland, where he remained unt il his retirement in 1955.
Although quantum mechanics uses sophisticated mathema tics, you do not need to understand the mathematical details to follow
our discussion of its general conclusions. We focus on the properties of the wave functions that are the solutions of Schrödinger’s
equations.
Wave Functions
A wave function (Ψ) is a mathematical function that relates the location of an electron at a given point in space (identified by three
spatial coordinates) to the amplitude of its wave, which corresponds to its energy. Thus each wave function is associated with a
particular energy E. The properties of wave functions derived from quantum mechanics are summarized here:
A wave function uses three variables to describe the position of an elect ron. A fourth variable is usually required to fully
describe the location of objects in motion. Three specify the position in space (as with the Cartesian coordinates x, y, and z -orSpherical coordinates (r, θ, φ)), and one specifies the time at which the object is at the specified location. For example, if you
were the captain of a ship trying to intercept an enemy su bmarine, you would need to know its latitude, longitude, and depth, as
well as the time at which it was going to be at this position (Figure 6.5.1).
Figure: The Four Variables (Latitude, Longitude, Depth, and Time) req uired to precisely locate an object
For electrons, we will be using standing waves, which do no t vary with time, to describe the position of an ele ctron.
Spherical coordinates (r, and) are commonly used when describing the position of a n electron within an atom. We willLearning Objectives
Erwin Schrödinger (1887–1961)

5.1.5.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170007often focus only on the radial component of the wave function! Note that the value of the r-coordinate t ells us the distance of
the electron from the nucleus (at r=0).
xyz
r
θ
φ(r, θ, φ)
Figure: Spherical coordinates (r, θ, φ) as commonly used to locate an electron within an atom: r adial distance r, polar
angle θ (theta), and azimuthal angle φ (phi). (The symbol ρ (rho) is often used instead of r.) Andeggs, Public domain, via
Wikimedia Commons
The magnitude of the wave function at a particular point in space is propor tional to the amplitude of the wave at that
point. Many wave functions are complex functions, which is a ma thematical term indicating that they contain, represent ed
as. Hence the amplitude of the wave has no real physical si gnificance. In contrast, the sign of the wave function (eit her
positive or negative) corresponds to the phase of the wave, which will be important in our discussion of chemical bondin g. The
sign of the wave function should not be confused with a positive or negative electrical cha rge.
The square of the wave function at a given point is proportional to the pro bability of finding an electron at that point,
which leads to a distribution of probabilities in space. The square of the wave function () is always a real quantit y [recall
that that] and is proportional to the probability of find ing an electron at a given point. More accurately, the
probability is given by the product of the wave function Ψ and its complex conjugate Ψ*, in which all terms that contai n i are
replaced by. We use probabilities because, according to Heisenberg’s uncertainty principle, we cannot precise ly specify the
position of an electron. The probability of finding an e lectron at any point in space depends on several factors, incl uding the
distance from the nucleus and, in many cases, the atomic equivalent of latitude and longitude. As one way of graph ically
representing the probability distribution, the probabili ty of finding an electron is indicated by the density of c olored dots, as
shown for the ground state of the hydrogen atom in Figure.
Describing the electron distribution as a standing wave leads to sets of quantum numbers that are characteristic of each
wave function. From the patterns of one- and two-dimensional standing wa ves shown previously, you might expect (correctly)
that the patterns of three-dimensional standing waves woul d be complex. Fortunately, however, in the 18th century, a Fren ch
mathematician, Adrien Legendre (1752–1783), developed a set of equations to describe the motion of tidal waves on the surface
of a flooded planet. Schrödinger incorporated Legendre’ s equations into his wave functions. The requirement tha t the waves
must be in phase with one another to avoid cancelation and produce a standing wave results in a limited number of so lutions
(wave functions), each of which is specified by a set of n umbers called quantum numbers.
Each wave function is associated with a particular energy. As in Bohr’s model, the energy of an electron in an atom is
quantized; it can have only certain allowed values. The m ajor difference between Bohr’s model and Schrödinger’s ap proach is
that Bohr had to impose the idea of quantization arbitra rily, whereas in Schrödinger’s approach, quantization i s a natural
consequence of describing an electron as a standing wave.

5.1.5.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170007
Figure: Probability of Finding the Electron in the Gro und State of the Hydrogen Atom at Different Points in Space. (a) The
density of the dots shows electron probability. (b) In this plot of Ψ versus r for the ground state of the hydrogen atom, the elec tron
probability density is greatest at r = 0 (the nucleus) and falls off with increasing r. Because the line never actually reaches the
horizontal axis, the probability of finding the elec tron at very large values of r is very small but not zero.
Atomic Orbitals
You’ve probably seen the term “orbital” in previous chemistry classes. An orbital is a distribution for a n electron. In other words,
“an orbital” means “a map of where the electron tends to spend its time.” This map is provided by the wave f unction (Ψ), so
“orbital” and “wave function” mean the same thing (more or less).
Visualizing an orbital can be tricky, because electr ons can be just about anywhere. The electron in a hy drogen atom could be one
foot away from the nucleus. However, this is extremely unlikely; the probability of the electron being th at far away is around 10
. Electrons spend the vast majority of their time cl ose to the nucleus. To depict an orbital, then, we can draw a picture of
the region in which the electron spends 90% of its time; thi s is called the 90% contour.
We can only calculate wave functions for atoms with o ne electron, so we can only draw pictures of orbitals fo r one-electron atoms.
When we do this for hydrogen, we notice a few things right awa y….
1) Orbitals that have different energies are always different sizes. For example, here are the 90% contours of the simple stlooking orbitals for energy levels 1, 2 and 3 in a hydroge n atom, along with the diameters of the 90% contours.
2) Some orbitals have the same energy, but are diffe rent shapes. For example, here are the 90% contours of two orbital s that
have the same energy. Note that although their shape s are different, they are roughly the same size, becau se they have the
same energy.2
2,502,324,325

5.1.5.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170007
3) Most orbitals have at least one nodal surface. A nodal surface is a plane or a sphere on which th e electron can never be
found; the probability of the electron appearing on the nodal surface is zero. Nodal surfaces are directly connected with the
energy of an orbital. The higher the energy of the orbital, the larger the number of nodal surfa ces.
A spherical nodal surface is called a radial node, because you can describe it completely by telling what its radius is. When
an orbital has a radial node, the electron can be in side the sphere, or outside the sphere, but never o n the sphere. For example,
the 2s orbital has a radial node, which is shown as a red dashed circle in the picture below. The electron spends about 5% of
its time inside the red circle (actually a sphere) and 95% o f its time outside the circle.
A planar nodal surface is called an angular node, because you can describe it by telling what angle it makes with one of the
Cartesian axes. When an orbital has an angular node, t he electron can be on either side of the plane, but never on it. For
example, the 2p orbital has an angular node (a horiz ontal plane), as shown below. The plane extends infinite ly far in all
directions.
Orbitals can have more than one nodal surface. For exam ple, the 3p orbital has two nodal surfaces: a radial node (a sphere) and an
angular node (a plane).
Quantum Numbers
Schrödinger’s approach uses three quantum numbers (n, l, and m) to specify any wavefunction. You can think of them as a sort of
shorthand notation for the wavefunction. The quantum numbers provide information about the spatial dist ribution of an electron.
Although n can be any positive integer, only certain values of l and m are allowed for a given value of n.
The Principal Quantum Number
The principal quantum number (n) gives us a great deal of information about an orbital. It tells us…
…the energy of the orbital
…the relative size of the orbital (larger n = larger orbital)
…the number of nodal surfaces that the orbital has (it’s always n – 1)z
z
l
l

5.1.5.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170007The name of any orbital always starts with the value o f n. For a 1s orbital, n = 1, and for a 2p orbital, n = 2. The principal quantum
number also tells us how many different orbitals (wave functions) have a particular energy. For any energy level, the total
number of orbitals is n. For example, there are four different orbitals that have n = 2 (because 2 = 4) and nine different orbit als
that have n = 3 (because 3 = 9).
There is no limit on the size of n; it can be any n umber from 1 to infinity. As n gets larger, the energ y of the orbital gets larger
(closer to zero) and the electron gets farther from the nucleus on average. When the energy reaches zer o, the electron is completely
removed from the atom.
All wave functions that have the same value of n are said to constitute a principal shell because t hose electrons have similar
average distances from the nucleus and energies. As y ou will see, the principal quantum number n corresponds to the n used by
Bohr to describe electron orbits and by Rydberg to des cribe atomic energy levels.
The Azimuthal Quantum Number
The second quantum number is often called the azimuthal quantum number (l). The azimuthal quantum number tells us the
general shape of an orbital. Specifically, it tells us the number of angular nodes that the orbital has. The angular nodes create the
shape of an orbital. For instance, look at the differe nce between a 2s orbital (no angular nodes) and a 2p orbital (one angular node).
Both orbitals have one nodal surface, but the 2s orbi tal has a radial node (a sphere), which is hidden insi de the 90% contour,
whereas the 2p orbital has an angular node, which chops the orbital into two pieces.
The value of l is always part of the orbital’s name, but i t is “coded” in the following fashion:
If l = 0, we have an s orbital (1s, 2s, 3s, 4s, 5s…)
If l = 1, we have a p orbital (2p, 3p, 4p, 5p…)
If l = 2, we have a d orbital (3d, 4d, 5d…)
If l = 3, we have an f orbital (4f, 5f…)
The value of l also tells us how many orbitals of tha t type there are. If we specify both n and l, the total number of orbitals is 2l
+ 1. For example, there are five different 3d orbitals, because l = 2 for any kind of d orbital, and (2 × 2) + 1 = 5. The value of n
doesn’t matter; there are also five different 4d orbi tals, five different 5d orbitals, etc.
The value of l is limited by the value of n, becaus e the number of angular nodes can’t be larger than t he total number of nodes
(which is n – 1). Therefore, l is always smaller than n. The allowed values of l depend on the value of n and can range from 0 to n
− 1:
For example, if n = 1, l can be only 0; if n = 2, l can be 0 or 1; and so forth. For a given atom, all wa ve functions that have the same
values of both n and l form a subshell. The regions of space occupied by ele ctrons in the same subshell usually have the same
shape, but they are oriented differently in space.2 2

5.1.5.6 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170007Here are some sample questions to illustrate the concept s we’ve looked at so far.
If n = 4, what are the possible values of l?
l can be 0, 1, 2 or 3.

What are the names of each of the orbitals that correspond to these com binations of n and l?
4s orbital (n = 4, l = 0), 4p orbital (n = 4, l = 1), 4d orbital (n = 4, l = 2), and 4f orbital (n = 4, l = 3).

How many nodes does each of these orbitals have? How many of them a re angular and how many are radial?
All of these orbitals have 3 nodes, because the number of nodes equals n – 1, and n is 4 for all of these orbitals.
· The 4s orbital has l = 0, so it has no angular nodes. We already know that it has three nodes, so it must have three radial
nodes.
· The 4p orbital has l = 1, so it has one angular node. Therefore, it must have tw o radial nodes.
· The 4d orbital has l = 2, so it has two angular nodes. Therefore, it must have one radial node.
· The 4f orbital has l = 3, so it has three angular nodes. Therefore, it has no rad ial nodes.

What is the energy of each of these orbitals?
These are hydrogen orbitals, so we can use the Bohr fo rmula to calculate their energy. We know that all of t hem have n = 4,
and the atomic number Z is 1 for hydrogen, so we have:
Note that all four of these orbitals have the same energ y.

Rank these orbitals in order of size.
They are all approximately the same size, because they have the same value of n.

If an orbital has n = 7 and l = 2, what type of orbital is it?
It is a 7d orbital.

How many nodes does this orbital have? How many of them are radia l nodes?
This orbital has six nodes, because the number of nodes equals n – 1, and 7 – 1 = 6. To find the number of r adial nodes, we
must find the number of angular nodes. The number of angula r nodes always equals l, so this orbital has 2 angular nodes.
Therefore, it has 6 – 2 = 4 radial nodes.

A hydrogen orbital has one angular node and four radial nodes. What kind of orb ital is it?
This is a 6p orbital. It has one angular node, so l = 1, making it a p orbital. The total number of nodes is 1 + 4= 5, and this
must equal n – 1, so n = 6 for this orbital.
Example: Interpreting n and l

5.1.5.7 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170007A hydrogen orbital has five radial nodes, and its energy is -16.21 k J/mol. What type of orbital is it?
We can calculate the value of n for this orbital, because we k now its energy:
Solving for n gives n = 8.999965…, which we round to 9, since n must be a whole number. Next, we figure out the value of l.
Since n = 9, this orbital has 8 nodes. We’re told th at five of them are radial nodes, so the orbital has 8 – 5 = 3 angular nodes.
Therefore, n = 9 and l = 3 for this orbital, making it a 9f orbital.

How many orbitals have n = 4?
There are 16 orbitals that have n = 4. The total number of orbi tals that have a given value of n is n; 4 = 16.

How many orbitals have n = 5 and l = 3?
There are 7 orbitals that have this combination of n and l. The number of orbitals that have a specific combinatio n of n and l is
2l + 1; (2 × 3) + 1 = 7.

How many orbitals have n = 5 and l = 5?
No orbitals have this combination. l must always be smaller than n, because the total number of nodes is n – 1 and the number
of angular nodes is l. Therefore, the largest possible value of l is n – 1.

How many 6s orbitals are there?
There is just one 6s orbital. For 6s orbitals, n = 6 and l = 0. The number of orbitals that has this combination of n and l is 2l +
1 = (2 × 0) + 1 = 1.
The Magnetic Quantum Number
The third quantum number is the magnetic quantum nu mber (). The magnetic quantum number tells us the orientation of an
orbital respect to an applied magnetic field.. More sp ecifically, it tells us the orientation of the angul ar nodes. For example, a 2p
orbital has one angular node, but that node can have thre e orientations: the xy plane, the xz plane, or the yz plane:
As a result, there are three different 2p orbitals, each orien ted along one of the Cartesian axes.2 2

5.1.5.8 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170007
The value of m determines the orientation of the or bital, essentially by determining how far the orbital i s from the z axis. If the
orbital is aligned along the z axis, m is zero. For the other orbitals, m is ±1; one o f the orbitals has m = -1 and the other has m = 1.
There is no fixed rule for this assignment though.
The possible values for m are controlled by the valu e of l. For a given value of l, m can be any integer from –l to +l. The
allowed values of therefore depend on the value of l: m can range from − l to l in integral steps:
For example, if l is 2 (i.e. if we are talking about d orbitals), m can be -2, -1, 0, 1, or 2. The number of o ptions for m must match
the total number of orbitals, which is 2l + 1; note tha t in this case, 2l + 1 = 5, and there are indeed five optio ns for the value of m.
Each wave function with an allowed combination of n, l, and m values describes an atomic orbital, a particular spatial distribution
for an electron. For a given set of quantum numbers, e ach principal shell has a fixed number of subshells, and each subshell has a
fixed number of orbitals.
How many subshells and orbitals are contained within the pri ncipal shell with n = 4?
Given: value of n
Asked for: number of subshells and orbitals in the principal shell
Strategy:
A. Given n = 4, calculate the allowed values of l. From these allowed values, count the number of subshells.
B. For each allowed value of l, calculate the allowed values of m. The sum of the number of orbitals in each subshell is the
number of orbitals in the principal shell.
Solution:
A We know that l can have all integral values from 0 to n − 1. If n = 4, then l can equal 0, 1, 2, or 3. Because the shell has four
values of l, it has four subshells, each of which will contain a d ifferent number of orbitals, depending on the allowe d values of
m.
B For l = 0, m can be only 0, and thus the l = 0 subshell has only one orbital. For l = 1, m can be 0 or ±1; thus the l = 1
subshell has three orbitals. For l = 2, m can be 0, ±1, or ±2, so there are five orbitals in t he l = 2 subshell. The last allowed
value of l is l = 3, for which m can be 0, ±1, ±2, or ±3, resulting in seven orbitals in the l = 3 subshell. The total number of
orbitals in the n = 4 principal shell is the sum of the number of orbital s in each subshell and is equal to n = 16
How many subshells and orbitals are in the principal shell with n = 3?
Answer
three subshells; nine orbitalsl
l l l l
l l
l
l l
l
l
Example: n=4 Shell Structure
l
l
l l
l
l
Exercise: n=3 Shell Structure

5.1.5.9 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170007We can summarize the relationships between the quantu m numbers and the number of subshells and orbitals as follows (Table
7.5.1):
Each principal shell has n subshells. For n = 1, only a single subshell is possible (1 s); for n = 2, there are two subshells (2 s and
2p); for n = 3, there are three subshells (3 s, 3p, and 3 d); and so forth. Every shell has an ns subshell, any shell with n ≥ 2 also
has an np subshell, and any shell with n ≥ 3 also has an nd subshell. Because a 2 d subshell would require both n = 2 and l = 2,
which is not an allowed value of l for n = 2, a 2 d subshell does not exist.
Each subshell has 2 l + 1 orbitals. This means that all ns subshells contain a single s orbital, all np subshells contain three p
orbitals, all nd subshells contain five d orbitals, and all nf subshells contain seven f orbitals.
Table: Values of n, l, and ml through n = 4
n lSubshell
DesignationNumber of Orbitals
in SubshellNumber of Orbitals
in Shell
1 0 1 s 0 1 1
20 2 s 0 1
1 2 p −1, 0, 1 3
30 3 s 0 1
9 1 3 p −1, 0, 1 3
2 3 d −2, −1, 0, 1, 2 5
40 4 s 0 1
161 4 p −1, 0, 1 3
2 4 d −2, −1, 0, 1, 2 5
3 4 f −3, −2, −1, 0, 1, 2, 3 7

Here are some sample questions that look at all three quan tum numbers we’ve examined so far: n, l, and m.
What are the possible values of n, l, and m for a 13f orbital?
The name of the orbital tells us that n is 13 and l is 3. (Remember the “ l code”: s, p, d, f corresponds to l = 0, 1, 2, 3.) Since l
is 3, m can be any integer from -3 to +3, so the possible v alues of m are -3, -2, -1, 0, 1, 2 and 3.

An orbital has n = 4, l = 2, and m = -2. What kind of orbital is this?
This is a 4d orbital. The value of m tells us about the orientation of the orbital, but I don’t expect you t o know which orbital
corresponds to which value of m, so you can ignore m when you’re naming orbitals.

How many different orbitals have n = 6, l = 1, and m = 1?
Just one orbital has this combination. When you specify the values of all three quantum numbers, you have spe cified a single
orbital.

How many different orbitals have n = 6 and m = 1?Example: The Three Quantum Numbers
l
l
l l
l
l
l l
l
l

5.1.5.10 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170007This is a trickier question, because the question didn’t specify the value of l. We must consider all of the possible values of l
that are compatible with n = 6 and m = 1…
n = 6, l = 0, m = 1 impossible, m can’t be larger than l
n = 6, l = 1, m = 1 okay – this is a 6p orbital
n = 6, l = 2, m = 1 okay – this is a 6d orbital
n = 6, l = 3, m = 1 okay – this is a 6f orbital
n = 6, l = 4, m = 1 okay – this is a 6g orbital (but you don't need to know that)
n = 6, l = 5, m = 1 okay – this is a 6h orbital (but you don’t need t o know that)
n = 6, l = 6, m = 1 impossible, l must be smaller than n
l larger than 6 impossible, l must be smaller than n
Counting up the acceptable combinations, we see that ther e are five orbitals that have n = 6 and m = 1.

How many different orbitals have l = 3 and m = -2?
Infinite orbitals have this combination, because we didn ’t specify the value of n. We know that n must be larg er than l, but that
just means that n can’t be 1, 2 or 3; it can still be any number from 4 to infinity. We could have a 4f or bital (n = 4, l = 3), a 5f
orbital (n = 5, l = 3), a 6f orbital (n = 6, l = 3), etc. etc.
Summary
There is a relationship between the motions of elect rons in atoms and molecules and their energies that i s described by quantum
mechanics. Because of wave–particle duality, scienti sts must deal with the probability of an electron be ing at a particular point in
space. To do so required the development of quantum mechanics, which uses wave functions (Ψ) to describe the mathematical
relationship between the motion of electrons in atoms and molecules and their energies. Wave functions h ave five important
properties:
1. the wave function uses three spatial variables (Cartes ian coordinates: x, y, and z -or- Spherical coordinates (r, θ, φ)) to describe
the position of an electron;
2. the magnitude of the wave function is proportional t o the intensity of the wave;
3. the probability of finding an electron at a given p oint is proportional to the square of the wave function a t that point, leading to a
distribution of probabilities in space that is often p ortrayed as an electron density plot;
4. describing electron distributions as standing waves lead s naturally to the existence of sets of quantum numbers characteristic
of each wave function; and
5. each spatial distribution of the electron described by a wave function with a given set of quantum numbers has a pa rticular
energy.
Quantum numbers provide important information about t he energy and spatial distribution of an electron. T he principal quantum
number n can be any positive integer; as n increases for an atom, the average distance of the el ectron from the nucleus also
increases. All wave functions with the same value of n constitute a principal shell in which the electrons have similar average
distances from the nucleus. The azimuthal quantum number l can have integral values between 0 and n − 1; it describes the
shape of the electron distribution. Wave functions t hat have the same values of both n and l constitute a subshell, corresponding to
electron distributions that usually differ in orienta tion rather than in shape or average distance from t he nucleus. The magnetic
quantum number m can have 2 l + 1 integral values, ranging from − l to + l, and describes the orientation of the electron
distribution. Each wave function with a given set of v alues of n, l, and m describes a particular spatial distribution of an ele ctron in
an atom, an atomic orbital.
5.1.5: Quantum Mechanics and Atomic Orbitals is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
LibreTexts.l
l l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l

5.1.6.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1700085.1.6: 3D Representation of Orbitals
To understand the 3D representation of electronic orbit als
An orbital is the quantum mechanical refinement of B ohr’s orbit. In contrast to his concept of a simple circular orbit with a fixed
radius, orbitals are mathematically derived regions of spa ce with different probabilities of containing an electron.
One way of representing electron probability distribu tions was illustrated previously for the 1 s orbital of hydrogen. Because Ψ
gives the probability of finding an electron in a gi ven volume of space (such as a cubic picometer), a plot of Ψ versus distance
from the nucleus (r) is a plot of the probability density. The 1 s orbital is spherically symmetrical, so the probabi lity of finding a 1 s
electron at any given point depends only on its distance from the nucleus. The probability densi ty is greatest at r = 0 (at the
nucleus) and decreases steadily with increasing distanc e. At very large values of r, the electron probability density is very small but
not zero.
In contrast, we can calculate the radial probability (the probability of finding a 1 s electron at a distance r from the nucleus) by
adding together the probabilities of an electron bei ng at all points on a series of x spherical shells of radius r, r, r,…, r, r. In
effect, we are dividing the atom into very thin conce ntric shells, much like the layers of an onion (Figure), and calculating
the probability of finding an electron on each spher ical shell. Recall that the electron probability den sity is greatest at r = 0 (Figure
), so the density of dots is greatest for the smalles t spherical shells in part (a) in Figure. In contrast, the surface area of
each spherical shell is equal to 4π r, which increases very rapidly with increasing r (Figure). Because the surface area of
the spherical shells increases more rapidly with increa sing r than the electron probability density decreases, t he plot of radial
probability has a maximum at a particular distance (Figure). Most important, when r is very small, the surface area of a
spherical shell is so small that the total probability of finding an electron close to the nuc leus is very low; at the nucleus, the
electron probability vanishes (Figure).
Figure: Most Probable Radius for the Electron in the Ground Stat e of the Hydrogen Atom. (a) Imagine dividing the atom’ s
total volume into very thin concentric shells as shown in the onio n drawing. (b) A plot of electron probability density Ψ versus r
shows that the electron probability density is greates t at r = 0 and falls off smoothly with increasing r. The density of the dots is
therefore greatest in the innermost shells of the onion. (c) The surface area of each shell, given by 4πr, increases rap idly with
increasing r. (d) If we count the number of dots in each sph erical shell, we obtain the total probability of findi ng the electron at aLearning Objectives
1 2 3 x− 1 x

5.1.6.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170008given value of r. Because the surface area of each shell increases more rapidly with increasing r than the electro n probability
density decreases, a plot of electron probability versus r (the radial probability) shows a peak. This peak correspon ds to the most
probable radius for the electron, 52.9 pm, which is exactly the radius predicted by Bohr’ s model of the hydrogen atom.
For the hydrogen atom, the peak in the radial probabi lity plot occurs at r = 0.529 Å (52.9 pm), which is exactly the radius
calculated by Bohr for the n = 1 orbit. Thus the most probable radius obtained from quantum mechanics is identical to the radius
calculated by classical mechanics. In Bohr’s model, ho wever, the electron was assumed to be at this distance 1 00% of the time,
whereas in the Schrödinger model, it is at this distanc e only some of the time. The difference between the two models is
attributable to the wavelike behavior of the electron a nd the Heisenberg uncertainty principle.
Figure compares the electron probability densities fo r the hydrogen 1 s, 2s, and 3 s orbitals. Note that all three are spherically
symmetrical. For the 2 s and 3 s orbitals, however (and for all other s orbitals as well), the electron probability density d oes not fall
off smoothly with increasing r. Instead, a series of minima and maxima are observed in the radial probability plots (Figure).
The minima correspond to spherical nodes (regions of zero electron probability), which alterna te with spherical regions of nonzero
electron probability. The existence of these nodes is a consequence of changes of wave phase in the wavefunction Ψ.
Figure: Probability Densities for the 1s, 2s, and 3s Orbitals of t he Hydrogen Atom. (a) The electron probability density in
any plane that contains the nucleus is shown. Note the p resence of circular regions, or nodes, where the probabilit y density is zero.
(b) Contour surfaces enclose 90% of the electron probabili ty, which illustrates the different sizes of the 1s, 2s, an d 3s orbitals. The
cutaway drawings give partial views of the internal spherical nodes. The orange color corresponds to regions of space where the
phase of the wave function is positive, and the blue colo r corresponds to regions of space where the phase of the wave function is
negative. (c) In these plots of electron probability as a function of distance from the nucleus (r) in all directi ons (radial
probability), the most probable radius increases as n increases, but the 2s and 3s orbitals have regions of significant ele ctron
probability at small values of r.

5.1.6.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170008s Orbitals (l=0)
Three things happen to s orbitals as n increases (Figure):
1. They become larger, extending farther from the nucle us.
2. They contain more nodes. This is similar to a standing wav e that has regions of significant amplitude separated by nodes, points
with zero amplitude.
3. For a given atom, the s orbitals also become higher in energy as n increases because of their increased distance from the
nucleus.
Orbitals are generally drawn as three-dimensional surf aces that enclose 90% of the electron density, as was shown for the hydrogen
1s, 2s, and 3 s orbitals in part (b) in Figure. Although such drawin gs show the relative sizes of the orbitals, they do no t
normally show the spherical nodes in the 2 s and 3 s orbitals because the spherical nodes lie inside the 90% surface. Fortunately, the
positions of the spherical nodes are not important for ch emical bonding.
p Orbitals (l=1)
Only s orbitals are spherically symmetrical. As the value of l increases, the number of orbitals in a given subshell increases, and the
shapes of the orbitals become more complex. Because the 2 p subshell has l = 1, with three values of m (−1, 0, and +1), there are
three 2 p orbitals.
Figure: Electron Probability Distribution for a Hydr ogen 2 p Orbital. The nodal plane of zero electron density se parates the
two lobes of the 2 p orbital. As in Figure, the colors correspond to regio ns of space where the phase of the wave function is
positive (orange) and negative (blue).
The electron probability distribution for one of th e hydrogen 2 p orbitals is shown in Figure. Because this orbital ha s two
lobes of electron density arranged along the z axis, with an electron density of zero in the xy plane (i.e., the xy plane is a nodal
plane), it is a orbital. As shown in Figure, the other two 2 p orbitals have identical shapes, but they lie along the x axis (
) and y axis (), respectively. Note that each p orbital has just one angular node. The angular node has the shape of plane in
the following illustrations. In each case, the phase of the wave function for each of the 2 p orbitals is positive for the lobe that points
along the positive axis and negative for the lobe th at points along the negative axis. It is important to emphasize that these signs
correspond to the phase of the wave that describes the electron motion, not to positive or negative charges.
l

5.1.6.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170008Figure The Three Equivalent 2 p Orbitals of the Hydrogen Atom
The surfaces shown enclose 90% of the total electron probability for the 2 p, 2p, and 2 p orbitals. Each orbital is oriented along the
axis indicated by the subscript and a nodal plane th at is perpendicular to that axis bisects each 2 p orbital. The phase of the wave
function is positive (orange) in the region of space where x, y, or z is positive and negative (blue) where x, y, or z is negative. Just
as with the s orbitals, the size and complexity of the p orbitals for any atom increase as the principal qua ntum number n increases.
The shapes of the 90% probability surfaces of the 3 p, 4p, and higher-energy p orbitals are, however, essentially the same as those
shown in Figure.
d Orbitals (l=2)
Subshells with l = 2 have five d orbitals; the first principal shell to have a d subshell corresponds to n = 3. The five d orbitals have
m values of −2, −1, 0, +1, and +2.
Figure: The Five Equivalent 3d Orbitals of the Hydro gen Atom. The surfaces shown enclose 90% of the total e lectron
probability for the five hydrogen 3d orbitals. Four of the five 3d orbitals consist of four lobes arranged in a plane that is intersected
by two perpendicular nodal planes. These four orbital s have the same shape but different orientations. The f ifth 3d orbital,, has
a distinct shape even though it is mathematically equi valent to the others. The phase of the wave function for the different lobes is
indicated by color: orange for positive and blue for negative.
The hydrogen 3d orbitals, shown in Figure, have more complex shapes than the 2p orbitals. All five 3d orbi tals contain two
angular nodes. The angular nodes have the shape of a planar or c onical surface where there is zero probability of find ing the
electron. Note the contrast as compared to one angula r node for each p orbital and zero angular nodes for each s orbital. In three of
the d orbitals, the lobes of electron density are or iented between the x and y, x and z, and y and z plane s; these orbitals are referred
to as the,, and orbitals, respectively. A fourth d orbital has lobes lying along the x and y axes; t his is the
orbital. The fifth 3d orbital, called the orbital, ha s a unique shape: it looks like a orbital combined wi th an additional
doughnut of electron probability lying in the xy pl ane. Despite its peculiar shape, the orbital is mathem atically equivalent to
the other four and has the same energy. In contrast t o p orbitals, the phase of the wave function for d orb itals is the same for
opposite pairs of lobes. As shown in Figure, the phase of the wave function is positive for the two lobes of the orbital
that lie along the z axis, whereas the phase of the wa ve function is negative for the doughnut of electron density in the xy plane.
Like the s and p orbitals, as n increases, the size of the d orbitals increases, but the overall shapes rema in similar to those depicted
in Figure.
f Orbitals (l=3)
Principal shells with n = 4 can have subshells with l = 3 and m values of −3, −2, −1, 0, +1, +2, and +3. These subshel ls consist of
seven f orbitals. Each f orbital has three angular nodes, so their shapes are co mplex. Because f orbitals are not particularly importantx y z
l
l

5.1.6.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170008for our purposes, we do not discuss them further, and orbital s with higher values of l are not discussed at all.
Orbital Energies
Although we have discussed the shapes of orbitals, we ha ve said little about their comparative energies. We begin our discussion of
orbital energies by considering atoms or ions with only a sin gle electron (such as H or He).
The relative energies of the atomic orbitals with n ≤ 4 for a hydrogen atom are plotted in Figure; not e that the orbital
energies depend on only the principal quantum number n. Consequently, the energies of the 2 s and 2 p orbitals of hydrogen are the
same; the energies of the 3 s, 3p, and 3 d orbitals are the same; and so forth. Quantum mechani cs predicts that in the hydrogen atom,
all orbitals with the same value of n (e.g., the three 2 p orbitals) are degenerate, meaning that they have the same energy. The
orbital energies obtained for hydrogen using quantum mechanics are exactly the same as the allowed energi es calculated by Bohr.
In contrast to Bohr’s model, however, which allowed onl y one orbit for each energy level, quantum mechanics predicts that there
are 4 orbitals with different electron density distributio ns in the n = 2 principal shell (one 2 s and three 2 p orbitals), 9 in the n = 3
principal shell, and 16 in the n = 4 principal shell.The different values of l and m for the individual orbitals within a given principa l
shell are not important for understanding the emissi on or absorption spectra of the hydrogen atom under most conditions, but they
do explain the splittings of the main lines that are observed when hydrogen atoms are placed in a magnetic field. Figure
shows that the energy levels become closer and closer together as the value of n increases, as expected because of the 1/ n
dependence of orbital energies.
Figure: Orbital Energy Level Diagram for the Hydrog en Atom with a single electron. Each box corresponds t o one orbital.
Note that the difference in energy between orbitals decreases rapidly with increasing values of n.
The energies of the orbitals in any species with only one electron can be calculated by a minor variatio n of Bohr’s equation, which
can be extended to other single-electron species by inco rporating the nuclear charge Z (the number of protons in the nucleus):
In general, both energy and radius decrease as the n uclear charge increases. Thus the most stable orbit als (those with the lowest
energy) are those closest to the nucleus. For example, in the ground state of the hydrogen atom, the single electron is in the 1s
orbital, whereas in the first excited state, the atom h as absorbed energy and the electron has been promote d to one of the n = 2
orbitals. In ions with only a single electron, the ene rgy of a given orbital depends on only n, and all su bshells within a principal
shell, such as the,, and orbitals, are degenerate.+
l

5.1.6.6 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170008Summary
The four chemically important types of atomic orbit al correspond to values of,,, and. Orbitals with are s orbitals
and they are spherically symmetrical with no angular nodes. The s orbitals have the greatest electron den sity occurring at the
nucleus. Orbitals with are p orbitals and contain a a ngular node (a nodal surface shaped like a plane) tha t includes the nucleus,
giving rise to a dumbbell shape. Orbitals with are d or bitals and have more complex shapes with two angular nodes (nodal
surfaces shaped like planes or cones). Orbitals with are f or bitals, which are still more complex.
Three things happen to all orbital types (s, p, d, f) as n increases:
1. They become larger, extending farther from the nucle us.
2. They contain more nodes. This is similar to a standing wav e that has regions of significant amplitude separated by nodes, points
with zero amplitude.
3. They become higher in energy as n increases.
Because its average distance from the nucleus determ ines the energy of an electron, each atomic orbital wi th a given set of quantum
numbers has a particular energy associated with it, the orbital energy.
In atoms or ions with only a single electron, all orbit als with the same value of have the same energy (the y are degenerate), and
the energies of the principal shells increase smoothly as increases. An atom or ion with the electron(s) in the lowest-energy
orbital(s) is said to be in its ground state, whereas an atom or ion in which one or more electrons occupy higher-energy orbitals is
said to be in an excited state.
Contributors and Attributions
Modified by Joshua Halpern (Howard University)
5.1.6: 3D Representation of Orbitals is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

5.1.7.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1700095.1.7: Many-Electron Atoms
Recognize that multi-electron atomics systems present a new complication: electron-electron repulsion!
Describe how the energy of atomic orbitals in multielect ron atoms depend on the values of both n and l.
Sketch an orbital energy diagram showing the typical or der for a multielectron atom.
Name the fourth quantum number and it's possible values.
Clearly state and apply the Pauli Exclusion Principle.
The quantum mechanical model allowed us to determine the energies of the hydrogen atomic orbitals; now we wou ld like to extend
this to describe the electronic structure of every e lement in the Periodic Table. The process of describi ng each atom’s electronic
structure consists, essentially, of beginning with hyd rogen and adding one proton and one electron at a t ime to create the next
heavier element in the table; however, interactions b etween electrons make this process a bit more complic ated than it sounds. All
stable nuclei other than hydrogen also contain one or more neutrons. Because neutrons have no electrical charge, however, they can
be ignored in the following discussion. Before demonst rating how to do this, however, we must introduce the concept of electron
spin and the Pauli principle.
Orbitals and their Energies
Unlike in hydrogen-like atoms with only one electron, in multielectron atoms the values of quantum number s n and l determine the
energies of an orbital. The energies of the differen t orbitals for a typical multielectron atom are sho wn in Figure. Within a
given principal shell of a multielectron atom, the orbital energies increase with increasing l. An ns orbital always lies below the
corresponding np orbital, which in turn lies below the nd orbital.Learning Objectives

5.1.7.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170009
Figure: Orbital Energy Level Diagram for a Typical Multielectron Atom
These energy differences are caused by the effects o f shielding and penetration, the extent to which a given orbital lies inside oth er
filled orbitals. For example, an electron in the 2 s orbital penetrates inside a filled 1 s orbital more than an electron in a 2 p orbital
does. Since electrons, all being negatively charged, repel each other, an electron closer to the nucleus p artially shields an electron
farther from the nucleus from the attractive effect of the positively charged nucleus. Hence in an atom with a filled 1 s orbital, the
effective nuclear charge (Z) experienced by a 2 s electron is greater than the Z experienced by a 2 p electron. Consequently, the
2s electron is more tightly bound to the nucleus and ha s a lower energy, consistent with the order of energies shown in Figure
Due to electron shielding, increases more rapidly going across a row of the periodic
table than going down a column.
Notice in Figure that the difference in energies betwe en subshells can be so large that the energies of or bitals from different
principal shells can become approximately equal. For example, the energy of the 3 d orbitals in most atoms is actually between the
energies of the 4 s and the 4 p orbitals.
Electron Spin: The Fourth Quantum Number
When scientists analyzed the emission and absorption spectra of the elements more closely, they saw that for elements having more
than one electron, nearly all the lines in the spec tra were actually pairs of very closely spaced lines. Because each line repre sents an
energy level available to electrons in the atom, th ere are twice as many energy levels available as would b e predicted solely based
on the quantum numbers,, and. Scientists also dis covered that applying a magnetic field caused the l ines in the pairs to split
farther apart. In 1925, two graduate students in physic s in the Netherlands, George Uhlenbeck (1900–1988) and Samuel Goudsmiteff eff

5.1.7.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170009(1902–1978), proposed that the splittings were caused by an electron spinning about its axis, much as Eart h spins about its axis.
When an electrically charged object spins, it produc es a magnetic moment parallel to the axis of rotati on, making it behave like a
magnet. Although the electron cannot be viewed solely as a particle, spinning or otherwise, it is indisputa ble that it does have a
magnetic moment. This magnetic moment is called electron spin.
Figure: Electron Spin. In a magnetic field, an electr on has two possible orientations with different energie s, one with spin
up, aligned with the magnetic field, and one with sp in down, aligned against it. All other orientations a re forbidden.
In an external magnetic field, the electron has two p ossible orientations (Figure Figure). These are descr ibed by a fourth
quantum number (m), which for any electron can have only two possible v alues, designated +½ (up) and −½ (down) to indicate
that the two orientations are opposites; the subscript s is for spin. An electron behaves like a magnet that h as one of two possible
orientations, aligned either with the magnetic field or a gainst it.
The Pauli Exclusion Principle
The implications of electron spin for chemistry were recognized almost immediately by an Austrian physici st, Wolfgang Pauli
(1900–1958; Nobel Prize in Physics, 1945), who determined that each orbital can contain no more than two elec trons. He
developed the Pauli exclusion principle: No two electrons in an atom can have the same values of all four quantum numbers (n, l,
m, m).
By giving the values of n, l, and m, we also specify a particular orbital (e.g., 1 s with n = 1, l = 0, m = 0). Because m has only two
possible values (+½ or −½), two electrons, and only two electrons, can occupy any given orbital, one with spin up and one with
spin down. With this information, we can proceed to con struct the entire periodic table, which was originally based on the physical
and chemical properties of the known elements.
List all the allowed combinations of the four quantum numbers (n, l, m, m) for electrons in a 2 p orbital and predict the
maximum number of electrons the 2 p subshell can accommodate.
Given: orbital
Asked for: allowed quantum numbers and maximum number of electrons i n orbital
Strategy:
A. List the quantum numbers (n, l, m) that correspond to an n = 2p orbital. List all allowed combinations of (n, l, m).
B. Build on these combinations to list all the allowed co mbinations of (n, l, m, m).
C. Add together the number of combinations to predict the maximum number of electrons the 2 p subshell can accommodate.
Solution:
A For a 2 p orbital, we know that n = 2, l = n − 1 = 1, and m = − l, (−l +1),…, (l − 1), l. There are only three possible
combinations of (n, l, m): (2, 1, 1), (2, 1, 0), and (2, 1, −1).
B Because m is independent of the other quantum numbers and can have values of only +½ and −½, there are six possibl e
combinations of (n, l, m, m): (2, 1, 1, +½), (2, 1, 1, −½), (2, 1, 0, +½), (2, 1, 0, −½), (2, 1, − 1, +½), and (2, 1, −1, −½).s
l s
l l s
Example
l s
l l
l s
l
l
s
l s

5.1.7.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170009C Hence the 2 p subshell, which consists of three 2 p orbitals (2 p, 2p, and 2 p), can contain a total of six electrons, two in each
orbital.
List all the allowed combinations of the four quantum numbers (n, l, m, m) for a 6 s orbital, and predict the total number of
electrons it can contain.
Answer
(6, 0, 0, +½), (6, 0, 0, −½); two electrons
Summary
The arrangement of atoms in the periodic table aris es from the lowest energy arrangement of electrons in the valence shell. In
addition to the three quantum numbers (n, l, m) dictated by quantum mechanics, a fourth quantum n umber is required to explain
certain properties of atoms. This is the electron spin quantum number (m), which can have values of +½ or −½ for any electron,
corresponding to the two possible orientations of an e lectron in a magnetic field. The concept of electron spin has important
consequences for chemistry because the Pauli exclusion principle implies that no orbital can contain more than two e lectrons
(with opposite spin).
5.1.7: Many-Electron Atoms is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.x y z
Exercise
l s
l
s

5.1.8.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1700105.1.8: Electron Configurations
To understand the basics of adding electrons to atomic orbi tals
To understand the basics of the Aufbau principle
The electron configuration of an element is the arr angement of its electrons in its atomic orbitals. B y knowing the electron
configuration of an element, we can predict and explain a great deal of its chemistry.
The Aufbau Principle
We construct the periodic table by following the aufb au principle (from German, meaning “building up”). Fir st we determine the
number of electrons in the atom; then we add electron s one at a time to the lowest-energy orbital availab le without violating the
Pauli principle. We use the orbital energy diagram of Figure, reco gnizing that each orbital can hold two electrons, one with
spin up ↑, corresponding to m = +½, which is arbitrarily written first, and one with spin down ↓, corresponding to m = −½. A
filled orbital is indicated by ↑↓, in which the elect ron spins are said to be paired. Here is a schematic orbital diagram for a hydrogen
atom in its ground state:
Figure: One electron in.
From the orbital diagram, we can write the electron co nfiguration in an abbreviated form in which the occu pied orbitals are
identified by their principal quantum number n and their value of l (s, p, d, or f), with the number of electrons in the subshell
indicated by a superscript. For hydrogen, therefore, the single electron is placed in the 1 s orbital, which is the orbital lowest in
energy (Figure), and the electron configuration is writ ten as 1 s and read as “one-s-one.”
A neutral helium atom, with an atomic number of 2 (Z = 2), has two electrons. We place one electron in th e orbital that is lowest in
energy, the 1 s orbital. From the Pauli exclusion principle, we know th at an orbital can contain two electrons with opposite s pin, so
we place the second electron in the same orbital as th e first but pointing down, so that the electrons are paired. The orbital diagram
for the helium atom is therefore
written as 1 s, where the superscript 2 implies the pairing of spins. Other wise, our configuration would violate the Pauli principle.
The next element is lithium, with Z = 3 and three electrons in the neutral atom. We kno w that the 1 s orbital can hold two of the
electrons with their spins paired; the third electron m ust enter a higher energy orbital. Figure 6.29 tells us that the next lowest
energy orbital is 2 s, so the orbital diagram for lithium is
This electron configuration is written as 1 s2s.
The next element is beryllium, with Z = 4 and four electrons. We fill both the 1 s and 2 s orbitals to achieve a 1 s2s electron
configuration:
Learning Objectives
s s
2 1
2 2

5.1.8.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170010When we reach boron, with Z = 5 and five electrons, we must place the fifth elec tron in one of the 2 p orbitals. Because all three 2 p
orbitals are degenerate, it doesn’t matter which one we se lect. The electron configuration of boron is 1 s2s2p:
At carbon, with Z = 6 and six electrons, we are faced with a choice. Sho uld the sixth electron be placed in the same 2 p orbital that
already has an electron, or should it go in one of the empty 2 p orbitals? If it goes in an empty 2 p orbital, will the sixth electron have
its spin aligned with or be opposite to the spin of the fifth? In short, which of the following three orbita l diagrams is correct for
carbon, remembering that the 2 p orbitals are degenerate?
Because of electron-electron interactions, it is more favorable energetically for an electron to be in a n unoccupied orbital than in
one that is already occupied; hence we can eliminate choice a. Similarly, experiments have shown that choic e b is slightly higher in
energy (less stable) than choice c because electrons in degenerate orbitals prefer to line up with their spins parallel; thus, we can
eliminate choice b. Choice c illustrates Hund’s rule (named after the German physicist Friedrich H. Hund, 18 96–1997), which
today says that the lowest-energy electron configuratio n for an atom is the one that has the maximum number of electrons with
parallel spins in degenerate orbitals. By Hund’s rule, the electron configuration of carbon, which is 1 s2s2p, is understood to
correspond to the orbital diagram shown in c. Experime ntally, it is found that the ground state of a neutr al carbon atom does indeed
contain two unpaired electrons.
When we get to nitrogen (Z = 7, with seven electrons), Hund’s rule tells us that the l owest-energy arrangement is
with three unpaired electrons. The electron configuration of nitrogen is thus 1 s2s2p.
At oxygen, with Z = 8 and eight electrons, we have no choice. One elec tron must be paired with another in one of the 2 p orbitals,
which gives us two unpaired electrons and a 1 s2s2p electron configuration. Because all the 2 p orbitals are degenerate, it doesn’t
matter which one has the pair of electrons.
Similarly, fluorine has the electron configuration 1 s2s2p:
2 2 1
2 2 2
2 2 3
2 2 4
2 2 5

5.1.8.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170010When we reach neon, with Z = 10, we have filled the 2 p subshell, giving a 1 s2s2p electron configuration:
Notice that for neon, as for helium, all the orbital s through the 2 p level are completely filled. This fact is very impo rtant in dictating
both the chemical reactivity and the bonding of helium an d neon, as you will see.
Valence Electrons
As we continue through the periodic table in this way, wri ting the electron configurations of larger and larg er atoms, it becomes
tedious to keep copying the configurations of the f illed inner subshells. In practice, chemists simplify t he notation by using a
bracketed noble gas symbol to represent the configura tion of the noble gas from the preceding row because a ll the orbitals in a
noble gas are filled. For example, [Ne] represents the 1s2s2p electron configuration of neon (Z = 10), so the electron
configuration of sodium, with Z = 11, which is 1 s2s2p3s, is written as [Ne]3 s:
Neon Z = 10 1 s2s2p
Sodium Z = 11 1 s2s2p3s = [Ne] 3s
Because electrons in filled inner orbitals are closer to the nucleus and more tightly bound to it, they ar e rarely involved in chemical
reactions. This means that the chemistry of an atom d epends mostly on the electrons in its outermost shell, which are called the
valence electrons. The simplified notation allows us to see the valen ce-electron configuration more easily. Using this notat ion to
compare the electron configurations of sodium and lithi um, we have:
Sodium 1s2s2p3s = [Ne]3 s
Lithium 1s2s = [He]2 s
It is readily apparent that both sodium and lithium have one s electron in their valence shell. We would therefore p redict that
sodium and lithium have very similar chemistry, which is in deed the case.
As we continue to build the eight elements of period 3, the 3 s and 3 p orbitals are filled, one electron at a time. This r ow concludes
with the noble gas argon, which has the electron configurati on [Ne]3 s3p, corresponding to a filled valence shell.
Draw an orbital diagram and use it to derive the elec tron configuration of phosphorus, Z = 15. What is its valence electron
configuration?
Given: atomic number
Asked for: orbital diagram and valence electron configuration for p hosphorus
Strategy:
A. Locate the nearest noble gas preceding phosphorus in the periodic table. Then subtract its number of electrons from those in
phosphorus to obtain the number of valence electrons in phosphorus.
B. Referring to Figure, draw an orbital diagram to repr esent those valence orbitals. Following Hund’s rule, place the
valence electrons in the available orbitals, beginnin g with the orbital that is lowest in energy. Write the electro n
configuration from your orbital diagram.
C. Ignore the inner orbitals (those that correspond to t he electron configuration of the nearest noble gas) and write the valence
electron configuration for phosphorus.
Solution:2 2 6
2 2 6
2 2 6 1 1
2 2 6
2 2 6 1 1
2 2 6 1 1
2 1 1
2 6
Example: Electronic Configuration of Phosphorus

5.1.8.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170010A Because phosphorus is in the third row of the periodi c table, we know that it has a [Ne] closed shell with 10 el ectrons. We
begin by subtracting 10 electrons from the 15 in phospho rus.
B The additional five electrons are placed in the next av ailable orbitals, which Figure tells us are the 3 s and 3 p orbitals:
Because the 3 s orbital is lower in energy than the 3 p orbitals, we fill it first:
Hund’s rule tells us that the remaining three electro ns will occupy the degenerate 3 p orbitals separately but with their spins
aligned:
The electron configuration is [Ne]3 s3p.
C We obtain the valence electron configuration by ig noring the inner orbitals, which for phosphorus means t hat we ignore the
[Ne] closed shell. This gives a valence-electron configu ration of 3 s3p.
Draw an orbital diagram and use it to derive the elec tron configuration of chlorine, Z = 17. What is its valence electron
configuration?
Answer
[Ne]3 s3p; 3s3p
The general order in which orbitals are filled is dep icted in Figure. Subshells corresponding to each valu e of n are written
from left to right on successive horizontal lines, whe re each row represents a row in the periodic table. Th e order in which the
orbitals are filled is indicated by the diagonal li nes running from the upper right to the lower left. Ac cordingly, the 4 s orbital is
filled prior to the 3 d orbital because of shielding and penetration effect s. Consequently, the electron configuration of potassi um,
which begins the fourth period, is [Ar]4 s, and the configuration of calcium is [Ar]4 s. Five 3 d orbitals are filled by the next 10
elements, the transition metals, followed by three 4 p orbitals. Notice that the last member of this row is th e noble gas krypton (Z =
36), [Ar]4 s3d4p = [Kr], which has filled 4 s, 3d, and 4 p orbitals. The fifth row of the periodic table is essent ially the same as the
fourth, except that the 5 s, 4d, and 5 p orbitals are filled sequentially.2 3
2 3
Exercise
2 5 2 5
1 2
2 10 6

5.1.8.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170010
Figure: Predicting the Order in Which Orbitals Are Fill ed in Multielectron Atoms. If you write the subshells f or each value
of the principal quantum number on successive lines, th e observed order in which they are filled is indicate d by a series of diagonal
lines running from the upper right to the lower left.
The sixth row of the periodic table will be different from the preceding two because the 4 f orbitals, which can hold 14 electrons, are
filled between the 6 s and the 5 d orbitals. The elements that contain 4 f orbitals in their valence shell are the lanthanide s. When the
6p orbitals are finally filled, we have reached the ne xt noble gas, radon (Z = 86), [Xe]6 s4f5d6p = [Rn]. In the last row, the 5 f
orbitals are filled between the 7 s and the 6 d orbitals, which gives the 14 actinide elements. Becaus e the large number of protons
makes their nuclei unstable, all the actinides are radioac tive.
Write the electron configuration of mercury (Z = 80), showing all the inner orbitals.
Given: atomic number
Asked for: complete electron configuration
Strategy:
Using the orbital diagram in Figure and the periodic table as a guide, fill the orbitals until all 80 ele ctrons have been
placed.
Solution:
By placing the electrons in orbitals following the or der shown in Figure and using the periodic table as a guide, we
obtain
1s row 1 2 electrons
2s2p row 2 8 electrons
3s3p row 3 8 electrons
4s3d4p row 4 18 electrons
5s4d5p row 5 18 electrons
row 1–5 54 electrons
After filling the first five rows, we still have 80 − 54 = 26 more electrons to accommodate. According to Figu re, we
need to fill the 6 s (2 electrons), 4 f (14 electrons), and 5 d (10 electrons) orbitals. The result is mercury’s electro n configuration:
1s2s2p3s3p4s3d4p5s4d5p6s4f5d = Hg = [Xe]6 s4f5d
with a filled 5 d subshell, a 6 s4f5d valence shell configuration, and a total of 80 elec trons. (You should always check to be
sure that the total number of electrons equals the atom ic number.)2 14 10 6
Example: Electron Configuration of Mercury
2 6
2 6
2 10 6
2 10 6
2 2 6 2 6 2 10 6 2 10 6 2 14 10 2 14 10
2 14 10

5.1.8.6 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170010Although element 114 is not stable enough to occur i n nature, atoms of element 114 were created for the f irst time in a nuclear
reactor in 1998 by a team of Russian and American sc ientists. The element is named after the Flerov Laborat ory of Nuclear
Reactions of the Joint Institute for Nuclear Research i n Dubna, Russia, where the element was discovered. The na me of the
laboratory, in turn, honors the Russian physicist Georgy Flyor ov. Write the complete electron configuration for elem ent 114.
Answer
s2s2p3s3p4s3d4p5s4d5p6s4f5d6p7s5f6d7p
The electron configurations of the elements are prese nted in Figure, which lists the orbitals in the order in which they are
filled. In several cases, the ground state electron con figurations are different from those predicted by Fi gure. Some of these
anomalies occur as the 3 d orbitals are filled. For example, the observed groun d state electron configuration of chromium is
[Ar]4 s3d rather than the predicted [Ar]4 s3d. Similarly, the observed electron configuration of c opper is [Ar]4 s3d instead of
[Ar]s3d. The actual electron configuration may be rational ized in terms of an added stability associated with a half-filled (ns,
np, nd, nf) or filled (ns, np, nd, nf) subshell. (In fact, this "special stability" is really another consequence of the instability
caused by pairing an electron with another in the sam e orbital, as illustrated by Hund's rule.) Given the sma ll differences between
higher energy levels, this added stability is enough to shift an electron from one orbital to another. In heavier elements, other more
complex effects can also be important, leading to ma ny additional anomalies. For example, cerium has an el ectron configuration of
[Xe]6 s4f5d, which is impossible to rationalize in simple terms. In most cases, however, these apparent anomalies do not have
important chemical consequences.
Additional stability is associated with half-filled or filled subshells.
Summary
Based on the Pauli principle and a knowledge of orbit al energies obtained using hydrogen-like orbitals, it is possible to construct
the periodic table by filling up the available orbi tals beginning with the lowest-energy orbitals (the aufbau principle), which gives
rise to a particular arrangement of electrons for e ach element (its electron configuration). Hund’s rule says that the lowest-energy
arrangement of electrons is the one that places them in d egenerate orbitals with their spins parallel. For chemical purposes, the most
important electrons are those in the outermost princi pal shell, the valence electrons.
5.1.8: Electron Configurations is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.Exercise: Electron Configuration of Flerovium
2 2 6 2 6 2 10 6 2 10 6 2 14 10 6 2 14 10 2
1 5 2 4 1 10
2 9 1
3 5 7 2 6 10 14
2 1 1

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
5.2: Periodic Properties of the Elements
Last chapter, we presented the contemporary quantum me chanical model of the atom. In using this model to describe the electronic
structures of the elements in order of increasing at omic number, we saw that periodic similarities in elect ron configuration correlate
with periodic similarities in properties, which is th e basis for the structure of the periodic table. For example, the noble gases have
what is often called filled or closed-shell valence el ectron configurations. These closed shells are actu ally filled s and p subshells
with a total of eight electrons, which are called octets; helium is an exception, with a closed 1 s shell that has only two electrons.
Because of their filled valence shells, the noble gas es are generally unreactive. In contrast, the alkali metals have a single valence
electron outside a closed shell and readily lose thi s electron to elements that require electrons to ac hieve an octet, such as the
halogens. Thus because of their periodic similaritie s in electron configuration, atoms in the same column of the periodic table tend
to form compounds with the same oxidation states and st oichiometries. Last chapter ended with the observation that, because all
the elements in a column have the same valence electr on configuration, the periodic table can be used to find the electron
configuration of most of the elements at a glance.
In this chapter, we explore the relationship between t he electron configurations of the elements, as reflec ted in their arrangement in
the periodic table, and their physical and chemical properties. In particular, we focus on the similariti es between elements in the
same column and on the trends in properties that are observed across horizontal rows or down vertical colu mns. By the end of this
chapter, your understanding of these trends and relat ionships will provide you with clues as to why argon is use d in incandescent
light bulbs, why coal and wood burst into flames when t hey come in contact with pure F, why aluminum was disc overed so late
despite being the third most abundant element in Ea rth’s crust, and why lithium is commonly used in batt eries. We begin by
expanding on the brief discussion of the history of t he periodic table and describing how it was created m any years before electrons
had even been discovered, much less discussed in terms of shells, subshells, orbitals, and electron spin.
5.2.1: Development of the Periodic Table
5.2.2: Shielding and Effective Nuclear Charge
5.2.3: Sizes of Atoms and Ions
5.2.4: Ionization Energy
5.2.5: Electron Affinities
5.2.6: Metals, Nonmetals, and Metalloids
5.2.7: Group Trends for the Active Metals
5.2.8: Group Trends for Selected Nonmetals
5.2: Periodic Properties of the Elements is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.2

5.2.1.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1700165.2.1: Development of the Periodic Table
To become familiar with the history of the periodic table.
The modern periodic table has evolved through a long history of attempts by chemists to arrange the element s according to their
properties as an aid in predicting chemical behavio r. One of the first to suggest such an arrangement was th e German chemist
Johannes Dobereiner (1780–1849), who noticed that man y of the known elements could be grouped in triads (a set of three
elements that have similar properties)—for example, chlorine, bromine, and iodine; or copper, silver, and gold. Dobereiner
proposed that all elements could be grouped in such triads, but subsequent attempts to expand his conce pt were unsuccessful. We
now know that portions of the periodic table—the d block in particular—contain triads of elements with substantial similarities.
The middle three members of most of the other column s, such as sulfur, selenium, and tellurium in group 16 o r aluminum, gallium,
and indium in Group 13, also have remarkably similar chem istry.
Figure: The Arrangement of the Elements into Octaves as Proposed by Newlands. The table shown here accompani ed a
letter from a 27-year-old Newlands to the editor of the journal Chemical News in which he wrote: “If the elements are arranged in
the order of their equivalents, with a few slight tra nspositions, as in the accompanying table, it will be o bserved that elements
belonging to the same group usually appear on the same horizontal line. It will also be seen that the numbe rs of analogous elements
generally differ either by 7 or by some multiple of seven; in other words, members of the same group stand t o each other in the
same relation as the extremities of one or more octave s in music. Thus, in the nitrogen group, between nitro gen and phosphorus
there are 7 elements; between phosphorus and arsenic, 1 4; between arsenic and antimony, 14; and lastly, betw een antimony and
bismuth, 14 also. This peculiar relationship I propose t o provisionally term the Law of Octaves. I am, &c. John A. R. Newlands,
F.C.S. Laboratory, 19, Great St. Helen’s, E.C., August 8, 1865.”
By the mid-19th century, the atomic masses of many of the elements had been determined. The English chem ist John Newlands
(1838–1898), hypothesizing that the chemistry of the elements might be related to their masses, arranged the known elements in
order of increasing atomic mass and discovered that every seventh element had similar properties (Figure). Newlands
therefore suggested that the elements could be classi fied into octaves. He described octaves as a group of seven elements which
correspond to the horizontal rows in the main groups o f today's periodic table. There were seven elements be cause the noble gases
were not known at the time. Unfortunately, Newlands’s “l aw of octaves” did not seem to work for elements heav ier than calcium,
and his idea was publicly ridiculed. At one scientific meeting, Newlands was asked why he didn’t arrange the el ements in
alphabetical order instead of by atomic mass, since t hat would make just as much sense! Actually, Newlands was on the right track
—with only a few exceptions, atomic mass does increase with atomic number, and similar properties occur eve ry time a set of
ns np subshells is filled. Despite the fact that Newlands’s t able had no logical place for the d-block elements, he was honored for
his idea by the Royal Society of London in 1887.
John Alexander Reina Newlands was an English chemist who worked on the development of the periodic table. He n oticed that
elemental properties repeated every seventh (or multip le of seven) element, as musical notes repeat every eighth n ote.Learning Objectives
2 6
John Newlands (1838–1898)

5.2.1.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170016
The periodic table achieved its modern form through the work of the German chemist Julius Lothar Meyer (18 30–1895) and the
Russian chemist Dimitri Mendeleev (1834–1907), both of whom focused on the relationships between atomic mass and various
physical and chemical properties. In 1869, they indep endently proposed essentially identical arrangements o f the elements. Meyer
aligned the elements in his table according to perio dic variations in simple atomic properties, such as “atomic volume” (Figure
), which he obtained by dividing the atomic mass (mol ar mass) in grams per mole by the density () of the e lement in grams
per cubic centimeter. This property is equivalent t o what is today defined as molar volume, the molar m ass of an element divided
by its density, (measured in cubic centimeters per mol e):
As shown in Figure, the alkali metals have the highest m olar volumes of the solid elements. In Meyer’s plot of atomic
volume versus atomic mass, the nonmetals occur on the rising portion of the graph, and metals occur at th e peaks, in the valleys,
and on the downslopes.
Figure: Variation of Atomic V olume with Atomic Numbe r, Adapted from Meyer’s Plot of 1870. Note the periodic increase
and decrease in atomic volume. Because the noble gases had not yet been discovered at the time this graph wa s formulated, the
peaks correspond to the alkali metals (Group 1).
When his family’s glass factory was destroyed by fire, Mendeleev moved to St. Petersburg, Russia, to study scien ce. He
became ill and was not expected to recover, but he finished his PhD with the help of his professors and fellow students.
Dimitri Mendeleev (1834–1907)

5.2.1.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170016In addition to the periodic table, another of Mendele ev’s contributions to science was an outstanding textboo k, The Principles
of Chemistry, which was used for many years.
Mendeleev’s Periodic Table
Mendeleev, who first published his periodic table in 1 869 (Figure), is usually credited with the origin of t he modern periodic
table. The key difference between his arrangement of the elements and that of Meyer and others is that Mende leev did not assume
that all the elements had been discovered (actually, only about two-thirds of the naturally occurring ele ments were known at the
time). Instead, he deliberately left blanks in his ta ble at atomic masses 44, 68, 72, and 100, in the expect ation that elements with
those atomic masses would be discovered. Those blanks correspond to the elements we now know as scandium, gall ium,
germanium, and technetium.
Figure: Mendeleev’s Periodic Table, as Published in the German Journal Annalen der Chemie und Pharmacie in 1872. The
column headings “Reihen” and “Gruppe” are German for “row” and “group.” Formulas indicate the type of com pounds formed by
each group, with “R” standing for “any element” and superscripts used where we now use subscripts. Atomic masses a re shown
after equal signs and increase across each row from left to right.
The groups in Mendeleev's table are determined by ho w many oxygen or hydrogen atoms are needed to form c ompounds with each
element. For example, in Group I, two atoms of hydrogen, l ithium, Li, sodium, Na, and potassium form compounds with one atom
of oxygen. In Group VII, one atom of fluorine, F, chlorin e, Cl, and bromine, Br, react with one atom of hydroge n. Notice how this
approach has trouble with the transition metals. Unti l roughly 1960, a rectangular table developed from Me ndeleev's table and
based on reactivity was standard at the front of chemistry lecture halls.
The most convincing evidence in support of Mendeleev ’s arrangement of the elements was the discovery of t wo previously
unknown elements whose properties closely corresponded with his predictions (Figure). Two of the blanks Mendel eev had
left in his original table were below aluminum and si licon, awaiting the discovery of two as-yet-unknown ele ments, eka-aluminum
and eka-silicon (from the Sanskrit eka, meaning “one,” as in “one beyond aluminum”). The o bserved properties of gallium and
germanium matched those of eka-aluminum and eka-silicon so well that once they were discovered, Mendele ev’s periodic table
rapidly gained acceptance.
When the chemical properties of an element suggeste d that it might have been assigned the wrong place in earlier tables,
Mendeleev carefully reexamined its atomic mass. He disc overed, for example, that the atomic masses previousl y reported for
beryllium, indium, and uranium were incorrect. The a tomic mass of indium had originally been reported a s 75.6, based on an
assumed stoichiometry of InO for its oxide. If this ato mic mass were correct, then indium would have to be pl aced in the middle of
the nonmetals, between arsenic (atomic mass 75) and selenium (atomic mass 78). Because elemental indium i s a silvery-white
metal, however, Mendeleev postulated that the stoichiometry o f its oxide was really In O rather than InO. This would mean that
indium’s atomic mass was actually 113, placing the eleme nt between two other metals, cadmium and tin.
Table: Comparison of the Properties Predicted by Mend eleev in 1869 for eka-Aluminum and eka-Silicon with the Properties of Gallium
(Discovered in 1875) and Germanium (Discovered in 188 6)2 3

5.2.1.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170016Propertyeka-Aluminum
(predicted)Gallium (observed) eka-Silicon (predicted) Germanium (observed)
atomic mass 68 69.723 72 72.64
elementmetal metal dirty-gray metal gray-white metal
low mp* mp = 29.8°C high mp mp = 938°C
= 5.9 g/cm = 5.91 g/cm = 5.5 g/cm = 5.323 g/cm
oxideE O Ga O EO GeO
= 5.5 g/cm = 6.0 g/cm = 4.7 g/cm = 4.25 g/cm
chlorideECl GaCl ECl GeCl
volatilemp = 78°C
bp* = 201°Cbp < 100°C bp = 87°C
*mp = melting point; bp = boiling point.
One group of elements that absent from Mendeleev’s ta ble is the noble gases, all of which were discovered m ore than 20 years
later, between 1894 and 1898, by Sir William Ramsay (18 52–1916; Nobel Prize in Chemistry 1904). Initially, Ramsa y did not
know where to place these elements in the periodic ta ble. Argon, the first to be discovered, had an atomic m ass of 40. This was
greater than chlorine’s and comparable to that of p otassium, so Ramsay, using the same kind of reasoning as Mendeleev, decided to
place the noble gases between the halogens and the alkali met als.
The Role of the Atomic Number in the Periodic Table
Despite its usefulness, Mendeleev’s periodic table was bas ed entirely on empirical observation supported by v ery little
understanding. It was not until 1913, when a young Briti sh physicist, H. G. J. Moseley (1887–1915), while analyzin g the
frequencies of x-rays emitted by the elements, discove red that the underlying foundation of the order of the elements was by the
atomic number, not the atomic mass. Moseley hypothesized that the placement of each element in his series corresponde d to its
atomic number Z, which is the number of positive charges (protons) in its nucleus. Argon, for example, although having a n atomic
mass greater than that of potassium (39.9 amu versus 39.1 amu, respectively), was placed before potassium in the periodic table.
While analyzing the frequencies of the emitted x-ray s, Moseley noticed that the atomic number of argon is 18, whereas that of
potassium is 19, which indicated that they were indeed placed correctly. Moseley also noticed three gaps in his table of x-ray
frequencies, so he predicted the existence of three un known elements: technetium (Z = 43), discovered in 1937; promethium (Z =
61), discovered in 1945; and rhenium (Z = 75), discovered in 1925.
Moseley left his research work at the University of Oxfor d to join the British army as a telecommunications of ficer during
World War I. He was killed during the Battle of Gallipoli in Turkey.
3 3 3 3
2 3 2 3 2 2
3 3 3 3
3 3 4 4
H. G. J. Moseley (1887–1915)

5.2.1.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170016Before its discovery in 1999, some theoreticians beli eved that an element with a Z of 114 existed in nature. Use Mendeleev’s
reasoning to name element 114 as eka-______; then identify the known element whose chemist ry you predict would be most
similar to that of element 114.
Given: atomic number
Asked for: name using prefix ekaStrategy:
A. Using the periodic table locate the n = 7 row. Identify the location of the unknown element with Z = 114; then identify the
known element that is directly above this location.
B. Name the unknown element by using the prefix eka- before the name of the known element.
Solution:
A The n = 7 row can be filled in by assuming the existence of elements with atomic numbers greater than 112, which is
underneath mercury (Hg). Counting three boxes to the ri ght gives element 114, which lies directly below lead (Pb).
B If Mendeleev were alive today, he would call element 114 eka-lead.
Use Mendeleev’s reasoning to name element 112 as eka-______; then identify the known element whose chemist ry you predict
would be most similar to that of element 112.
Answer
eka-mercury
Summary
The elements in the periodic table are arranged acc ording to their properties, and the periodic table serves as an aid in predicting
chemical behavior. The periodic table arranges the e lements according to their electron configurations, such that elements in the
same column have the same valence electron configura tions. Periodic variations in size and chemical prop erties are important
factors in dictating the types of chemical reaction s the elements undergo and the kinds of chemical co mpounds they form. The
modern periodic table was based on empirical correlat ions of properties such as atomic mass; early models using limited data noted
the existence of triads and octaves of elements with similar properties. The periodic ta ble achieved its current form through the
work of Dimitri Mendeleev and Julius Lothar Meyer, who b oth focused on the relationship between atomic mass an d chemical
properties. Meyer arranged the elements by their atom ic volume, which today is equivalent to the molar volume, defined as molar
mass divided by molar density. The correlation with the electronic structure of atoms was made when H. G. J. Mosel ey showed that
the periodic arrangement of the elements was determined by atomic number, not atomic mass.
Contributors and Attributions
Modified by Joshua Halpern (Howard University)
5.2.1: Development of the Periodic Table is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.Example
Exercise

5.2.2.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1700175.2.2: Shielding and Effective Nuclear Charge
To understand the basics of electron shielding and penet ration
For an atom or an ion with only a single electron, we c an calculate the potential energy by considering on ly the electrostatic
attraction between the positively charged nucleus and the negatively charged electron. When more than on e electron is present,
however, the total energy of the atom or the ion depe nds not only on attractive electron-nucleus interact ions but also on repulsive
electron-electron interactions. When there are two e lectrons, the repulsive interactions depend on the posit ions of both electrons at
a given instant, but because we cannot specify the ex act positions of the electrons, it is impossible to ex actly calculate the repulsive
interactions. Consequently, we must use approximate met hods to deal with the effect of electron-electron rep ulsions on orbital
energies. These effects are the underlying basis for the periodic trends in elemental properties that we will explore in this chapter.
Electron Shielding and Effective Nuclear Charge
If an electron is far from the nucleus (i.e., if the d istance between the nucleus and the electron is lar ge), then at any given moment,
many of the other electrons will be between that electron and the nucleus (Figure). Hence the e lectrons will cancel a portion
of the positive charge of the nucleus and thereby d ecrease the attractive interaction between it and th e electron farther away. As a
result, the electron farther away experiences an eff ective nuclear charge () that is less than the actua l nuclear charge. This
effect is called electron shielding.
Figure: This image shows how inner electrons can shield outer elect rons from the nuclear charge. (CC BY-SA 3.0; from
NikNaks).
As the distance between an electron and the nucleus app roaches infinity, approaches a value of 1 because a ll the other ()
electrons in the neutral atom are, on the average, bet ween it and the nucleus. If, on the other hand, an el ectron is very close to the
nucleus, then at any given moment most of the other electrons are farther from the nucleus and do not s hield the nuclear charge. At
, the positive charge experienced by an electron is approximately the full nuclear charge, or. At inte rmediate values
of, the effective nuclear charge is somewhere between 1 and:
Notice that only for hydrogen and only for helium are an d comparable in magnitude (Figure).
Shielding refers to the core electrons repelling the outer electrons, which lowers the effective charge o f the nucleus on the outer
electrons. Hence, the nucleus has "less grip" on the oute r electrons insofar as it is shielded from them.
can be calculated by subtracting the magnitude of s hielding from the total nuclear charge and the effe ctive nuclear charge of an
atom is given by the equation:
where is the atomic number (number of protons in nuc leus) and is the shielding constant. The value of wi ll provide
information on how much of a charge an electron actually experiences.Learning Objectives
Shielding

5.2.2.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170017We can see from Equation that the effective nuclea r charge of an atom increases as the number of prot ons in an atom
increases (Figure). Therefore as we go from left to right on the periodic table the effective nuclear c harge of an atom
increases in strength and holds the outer electrons closer and tighter to the nucleus. As we will discuss l ater on in the chapter, this
phenomenon can explain the decrease in atomic radii we see as we go across the periodic table as electron s are held closer to the
nucleus due to increase in number of protons and increase i n effective nuclear charge.
Figure: Relationship between the Effective Nuclear Ch arge Z and the Atomic Number Z for the Outer Electrons of the
Elements of the First Three Rows of the Periodic Table. Except for hydrogen, (is always less than, and (in creases from
left to right as you go across a row.
The shielding constant can be estimated by totaling the s creening by all electrons () except the one in question.
where is the shielding of the i electron.
Electrons that are shielded from the full charge of the nucleus experi ence an effective
nuclear charge () of the nucleus, which is some degree less than the full nuc lear
charge an electron would feel in a hydrogen atom or hydrogenlike ion.
From Equations and, for a specific electron can be estimated is the shielding constants for that electr on of all
other electrons in species is known. A simple approximatio n is that all other electrons shield equally and fully:
This crude approximation is demonstrated in Example.
What is the effective attraction experienced by the valence electrons in the three isoelectronic speci es: the fluorine anion,
the neutral neon atom, and sodium cation?
Solution
Each species has 10 electrons, and the number of no nvalence electrons is 2 (10 total electrons - 8 vale nce), but the effective
nuclear charge varies because each has a different at omic number. This is an application of Equations a nd. We
use the simple assumption that all electrons shield equally a nd fully the valence electrons (Equation).
The charge of the nucleus of a fluorine atom is 9, but the valence electrons are screened appreciably by the core electrons
(four electrons from the 1s and 2s orbitals) and partia lly by the 7 electrons in the 2p orbitals.eff
th
Example: Fluorine, Neon, and Sodium

5.2.2.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170017
Diagram of a fluorine atom showing the extent of effective nuclear charge. (CC BY-SA- 3.0; from NikNaks).
So the sodium cation has the greatest effective nucle ar charge. This also suggests that has the smallest radius of these
species and that is correct.
What is the effective attraction experienced by the valence electrons in the magnesium anion, the neutr al magnesium
atom, and magnesium cation? Use the simple approximation for shielding constants in Equations and.
Answer
Remember that the simple approximations in Equation s and suggest that valence electrons do not shield other
valence electrons. Therefore, each of these species has the same number of non-valence electrons and Equatio ns and
suggest the effective charge on each valence electro n is identical for each of the three species. However, this is not
correct!
The fact that these approximations are poor is sugge sted by the experimental Zeff value shown in Table f or Mg. The
value is appreciably larger than the +2 estimated ab ove. This indicates that a more complex model is nee ded to predict the
experimental observed Zeff value. The ability of val ence electrons to shield (or partially shield) other valence
electrons (e.g., Si≠1) shows that the simple approximatio ns used above overestimate the total shielding constan t S. A more
sophisticated model is needed.
Electron Penetration
The approximation in Equation is a good first order description of electron shielding, but the actual experienced by an
electron in a given orbital depends not only on the spatial distribution of the electron in that orbital but also on the distribution of
all the other electrons present. This leads to large di fferences in for different elements, as shown in Figure for the
elements of the first three rows of the periodic table.
Penetration describes the proximity to which an electr on can approach to the nucleus. In a multi-electron system, electron
penetration is defined by an electron's relative ele ctron density (probability density) near the nucleu s of an atom (Figure).
Electrons in different orbitals have different elect ron densities around the nucleus. In other words, pen etration depends on the shell
() and subshell ().
For example, a 1s electron (Figure; purple curve) has greater electron density near the nucleus than a 2p electron (Figure
; red curve) and has a greater penetration. This relat ed to the shielding constants since the 1s electron s are closer to the
nucleus than a 2p electron, hence the 1s screens a 2p electron almost perfectly (. However, the 2s electro n has a lower
shielding constant (because it can penetrate close to the nucleus in the small area of electron densit y within the first spherical
node (Figure; green curve). In this way the 2s electron c an "avoid" some of the shielding effect of the inner 1s el ectron.Exercise: Magnesium Species

5.2.2.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170017
Figure: Orbital Penetration. A comparison of the radia l probability distribution of the 2 s and 2 p orbitals for various states of
the hydrogen atom shows that the 2 s orbital penetrates inside the 1 s orbital more than the 2 p orbital does. Consequently, when an
electron is in the small inner lobe of the 2 s orbital, it experiences a relatively large value of, which causes the energy of the 2 s
orbital to be lower than the energy of the 2 p orbital.
For the same shell value () the penetrating power of an el ectron follows this trend in subshells (Figure):
for different values of shell (n) and subshell (l), penetr ating power of an electron follows this trend:
Penetration describes the proximity of electrons in a n orbital to the nucleus. Electrons that have greater penetration can get
closer to the nucleus and effectively block out the cha rge from electrons that have less proximity.
Table: Effective Nuclear Charges for Selected Atoms
Atom Sublevel Z Z
H 1s 1 1
He 1s 2 1.69
Li 1s, 2s 3 2.69, 1.28
Be 1s, 2s 4 3.68, 1.91
B 1s, 2s, 2p 5 4.68, 2.58, 2.42
F 1s, 2s, 2p 9 8.65, 5.13, 5.10
Na 1s, 2s, 2p, 3s 11 10.63, 6.57, 6.80, 2.51
Data from E. Clementi and D. L. Raimondi; The Journal of Chemical Ph ysics 38, 2686 (1963).
Because of the effects of shielding and the differe nt radial distributions of orbitals with the same val ue of n but different values of l,
the different subshells are not degenerate in a mul tielectron atom. For a given value of n, the ns orbital is always lower in energy
than the np orbitals, which are lower in energy than the nd orbitals, and so forth. As a result, some subshells with higher principal
quantum numbers are actually lower in energy than sub shells with a lower value of n; for example, the 4 s orbital is lower in energy
than the 3 d orbitals for most atoms.Penetration
eff

5.2.2.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170017The concepts of electron shielding, orbital penetrati on and effective nuclear charge were introduced abov e, but we did so in a
qualitative manner (e.g., Equations and). A more accu rate model for estimating electron shielding and
corresponding effective nuclear charge experienced i s Slater's Rules. However, the application of these rules i s outside the
scope of this text.
Summary
The calculation of orbital energies in atoms or ion s with more than one electron (multielectron atoms or ions) is complicated by
repulsive interactions between the electrons. The con cept of electron shielding, in which intervening electrons act to reduce the
positive nuclear charge experienced by an electron, allows the use of hydrogen-like orbitals and an effective nuclear charge ()
to describe electron distributions in more complex atoms or ions. The degree to which orbitals with diffe rent values of l and the
same value of n overlap or penetrate filled inner shells results in slightly different energies for different subshells in the same
principal shell in most atoms.
5.2.2: Shielding and Effective Nuclear Charge is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
LibreTexts.A Better Estimation of Shielding: Slater Rules

5.2.3.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1700185.2.3: Sizes of Atoms and Ions
To understand periodic trends in atomic radii.
To predict relative ionic sizes within an isoelectronic ser ies.
Although some people fall into the trap of visualizi ng atoms and ions as small, hard spheres similar to m iniature table-tennis balls
or marbles, the quantum mechanical model tells us th at their shapes and boundaries are much less definite than those images
suggest. As a result, atoms and ions cannot be said to ha ve exact sizes; however, some atoms are larger or smal ler than others, and
this influences their chemistry. In this section, we discuss h ow atomic and ion “sizes” are defined and obtained.
Atomic Radii
Recall that the probability of finding an electron in the various available orbitals falls off slowly as t he distance from the nucleus
increases. This point is illustrated in Figure which s hows a plot of total electron density for all occupie d orbitals for three
noble gases as a function of their distance from the nucleus. Electron density diminishes gradually with in creasing distance, which
makes it impossible to draw a sharp line marking the bou ndary of an atom.
Figure: Plots of Radial Probability as a Function of D istance from the Nucleus for He, Ne, and Ar. In He, t he 1s electrons
have a maximum radial probability at ≈30 pm from th e nucleus. In Ne, the 1 s electrons have a maximum at ≈8 pm, and the 2 s and
2p electrons combine to form another maximum at ≈35 pm (the n = 2 shell). In Ar, the 1 s electrons have a maximum at ≈2 pm, the
2s and 2 p electrons combine to form a maximum at ≈18 pm, and the 3 s and 3 p electrons combine to form a maximum at ≈70 pm.
Figure also shows that there are distinct peaks in th e total electron density at particular distances an d that these peaks occur
at different distances from the nucleus for each el ement. Each peak in a given plot corresponds to the e lectron density in a given
principal shell. Because helium has only one filled shell (n = 1), it shows only a single peak. In contrast, neon, with filled n = 1 and
2 principal shells, has two peaks. Argon, with filled n = 1, 2, and 3 principal shells, has three peaks. The peak for the filled n = 1
shell occurs at successively shorter distances for neo n (Z = 10) and argon (Z = 18) because, with a greater number of protons, the ir
nuclei are more positively charged than that of heli um. Because the 1 s shell is closest to the nucleus, its electrons are very poorly
shielded by electrons in filled shells with larger val ues of n. Consequently, the two electrons in the n = 1 shell experience nearly the
full nuclear charge, resulting in a strong electrostat ic interaction between the electrons and the nucleus. The energy of the n = 1
shell also decreases tremendously (the filled 1 s orbital becomes more stable) as the nuclear charge i ncreases. For similar reasons,
the filled n = 2 shell in argon is located closer to the nucleus and has a lower energy than the n = 2 shell in neon.
Figure illustrates the difficulty of measuring the dimensions of an individual atom. Because distances between the nuclei in
pairs of covalently bonded atoms can be measured qui te precisely, however, chemists use these distances as a basis for describing
the approximate sizes of atoms. For example, the inter nuclear distance in the diatomic Cl molecule is kno wn to be 198 pm. We
assign half of this distance to each chlorine atom, g iving chlorine a covalent atomic radius (), which is half the distance
between the nuclei of two like atoms joined by a cova lent bond in the same molecule, of 99 pm or 0.99 Å (Fig ure). Atomic
radii are often measured in angstroms (Å), a non-SI unit: 1 Å = 1 × 10 m = 100 pm.Learning Objectives
−10

5.2.3.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170018
Figure: Definitions of the Atomic Radius. (a) The cova lent atomic radius, r, is half the distance between the nuclei of two
like atoms joined by a covalent bond in the same mole cule, such as Cl. (b) The metallic atomic radius, r, is half the distance
between the nuclei of two adjacent atoms in a pure so lid metal, such as aluminum. (c) The van der Waals ato mic radius, r, is
half the distance between the nuclei of two like ato ms, such as argon, that are closely packed but not bond ed. (d) This is a depiction
of covalent versus van der Waals radii of chlorine. Th e covalent radius of Cl is half the distance between t he two chlorine atoms in
a single molecule of Cl. The van der Waals radius is ha lf the distance between chlorine nuclei in two diffe rent but touching Cl
molecules. Which do you think is larger? Why?
In a similar approach, we can use the lengths of carbo n–carbon single bonds in organic compounds, which ar e remarkably uniform
at 154 pm, to assign a value of 77 pm as the covalent atomic radius for carbon. If these values do indeed reflect the actual sizes of
the atoms, then we should be able to predict the lengt hs of covalent bonds formed between different elemen ts by adding them. For
example, we would predict a carbon–chlorine distance o f 77 pm + 99 pm = 176 pm for a C–Cl bond, which is ver y close to the
average value observed in many organochlorine compo unds. A similar approach for measuring the size of i ons is discussed later in
this section.
Covalent atomic radii can be determined for most of the nonmetals, but how do chemists obtain atomic radi i for elements that do
not form covalent bonds? For these elements, a varie ty of other methods have been developed. With a meta l, for example, the
metallic atomic radius () is defined as half the distance between the nucle i of two adjacent metal atoms in the solid (Figure
). For elements such as the noble gases, most of which f orm no stable compounds, we can use what is called th e van der
Waals atomic radius (), which is half the internuclear distance between two nonbonded atoms in the solid (Figure).
This is somewhat difficult for helium which does not fo rm a solid at any temperature. An atom such as chlor ine has both a covalent
radius (the distance between the two atoms in a molec ule) and a van der Waals radius (the distance between two Cl atoms in
different molecules in, for example, at low temperatur es). These radii are generally not the same (Figure).
Periodic Trends in Atomic Radii
Because it is impossible to measure the sizes of both metallic and nonmetallic elements using any one meth od, chemists have
developed a self-consistent way of calculating atomic radii using the quantum mechanical functions. Althou gh the radii values
obtained by such calculations are not identical to a ny of the experimentally measured sets of values, they do provide a way to
compare the intrinsic sizes of all the elements and cle arly show that atomic size varies in a periodic fashion (Figure).
Figure: A Plot of Periodic Variation of Atomic Radius w ith Atomic Number for the First Six Rows of the Periodi c Table
In the periodic table, atomic radii decrease from l eft to right across a row and increase from top to bo ttom down a column. Because
of these two trends, the largest atoms are found in t he lower left corner of the periodic table, and the smallest are found in the uppercov
2 met
vdW
2 2

5.2.3.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170018right corner (Figure).
Figure Calculated Atomic Radii (in Picometers) of the s-, p -, and d-Block Elements. The sizes of the circles illustra te the
relative sizes of the atoms. The calculated values are b ased on quantum mechanical wave functions. Source:
http://www.webelements.com. Web Elements is an excellent online source for lookin g up atomic properties.
Trends in atomic size result from differences in the effective nuclear charges () experienced by electrons in the outermost
orbitals of the elements. For all elements except H, the effective nuclear charge is always less than the actual nuclear charge
because of shielding effects. The greater the effectiv e nuclear charge, the more strongly the outermost el ectrons are attracted to the
nucleus and the smaller the atomic radius.
Atomic radii decrease from left to right across a row and increase fr om top to bottom
down a column.
The atoms in the second row of the periodic table (L i through Ne) illustrate the effect of electron shiel ding. All have a filled 1 s
inner shell, but as we go from left to right across th e row, the nuclear charge increases from +3 to +10. Al though electrons are being
added to the 2 s and 2 p orbitals, electrons in the same principal shell are not very e ffective at shielding one another from the nuclear
charge. Thus the single 2 s electron in lithium experiences an effective nucle ar charge of approximately +1 because the electrons in
the filled 1 s shell effectively neutralize two of the three positiv e charges in the nucleus. (More detailed calculations give a value of
Z = +1.26 for Li.) In contrast, the two 2 s electrons in beryllium do not shield each other ve ry well, although the filled 1 s shell
effectively neutralizes two of the four positive cha rges in the nucleus. This means that the effective n uclear charge experienced by
the 2 s electrons in beryllium is between +1 and +2 (the ca lculated value is +1.66). Consequently, beryllium is significantly smaller
than lithium. Similarly, as we proceed across the row, th e increasing nuclear charge is not effectively neutra lized by the electrons
being added to the 2 s and 2 p orbitals. The result is a steady increase in the e ffective nuclear charge and a steady decrease in at omic
size (Figure).2
eff2

5.2.3.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170018
Figure: The Atomic Radius of the Elements. The atomic radius of the elements increases as we go from right to left across a
period and as we go down the periods in a group.
The increase in atomic size going down a column is al so due to electron shielding, but the situation is mo re complex because the
principal quantum number n is not constant. As we saw in Chapter 2, the size of the o rbitals increases as n increases, provided the
nuclear charge remains the same. In group 1, for example, the size of the atoms incr eases substantially going down the column. It
may at first seem reasonable to attribute this effect to the successive addition of electrons to ns orbitals with increasing values of n.
However, it is important to remember that the radius o f an orbital depends dramatically on the nuclear ch arge. As we go down the
column of the group 1 elements, the principal quantu m number n increases from 2 to 6, but the nuclear charge increase s from +3 to
+55!
As a consequence the radii of the lower electron orbitals in Cesium are much smaller than those in lithium and the electrons in
those orbitals experience a much larger force of at traction to the nucleus. That force depends on the eff ective nuclear charge
experienced by the the inner electrons. If the outer most electrons in cesium experienced the full nuclear charge of +55, a cesium
atom would be very small indeed. In fact, the effect ive nuclear charge felt by the outermost electrons in cesium is much less than
expected (6 rather than 55). This means that cesium, with a 6 s valence electron configuration, is much larger than lithium, with a
2s valence electron configuration. The effective nucle ar charge changes relatively little for electrons i n the outermost, or valence
shell, from lithium to cesium because electrons in filled inner shells are highly effectiv e at shielding electrons in outer shells from
the nuclear charge. Even though cesium has a nuclear charge of +55, it has 54 electrons in its filled
1s2s2p3s3p4s3d4p5s4d5p shells, abbreviated as [Xe]5 s4d5p, which effectively neutralize most of the 55 positiv e
charges in the nucleus. The same dynamic is responsible for the steady increase in size observed as we go down the other columns
of the periodic table. Irregularities can usually be expl ained by variations in effective nuclear charge.
Electrons in the same principal shell are not very e ffective at shielding one another from the nuclear charge, whereas electrons
in filled inner shells are highly effective at shielding e lectrons in outer shells from the nuclear charge.
On the basis of their positions in the periodic table, arrange these elements in order of increasing atomic radius: aluminum,
carbon, and silicon.
Given: three elements
Asked for: arrange in order of increasing atomic radius
Strategy:
A. Identify the location of the elements in the periodic table. Determine the relative sizes of elements located in th e same
column from their principal quantum number n. Then determine the order of elements in the same row from their effective
nuclear charges. If the elements are not in the same column or row, use pairwise comparisons.1
2 2 6 2 6 2 10 6 2 10 6 2 10 6
Not all Electrons shield equally
Example

5.2.3.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170018B. List the elements in order of increasing atomic radius.
Solution:
A These elements are not all in the same column or r ow, so we must use pairwise comparisons. Carbon and sili con are both in
group 14 with carbon lying above, so carbon is smaller than silicon (C < Si). Aluminum and silicon are both in the third row
with aluminum lying to the left, so silicon is smaller than a luminum (Si < Al) because its effective nuclear charge is greater.
B Combining the two inequalities gives the overall order: C < Si < Al.
On the basis of their positions in the periodic table, arrange these elements in order of increasing size: oxygen, phosphorus,
potassium, and sulfur.
Answer
O < S < P < K
Ionic Radii and Isoelectronic Series
An ion is formed when either one or more electrons ar e removed from a neutral atom to form a positive ion (cation) or when
additional electrons attach themselves to neutral a toms to form a negative one (anion). The designation s cation or anion come from
the early experiments with electricity which found th at positively charged particles were attracted to the negative pole of a battery,
the cathode, while negatively charged ones were attracted to the positive pole, the anode.
Figure: Definition of Ionic Radius. (a) The internuc lear distance is apportioned between adjacent cations (positively charged
ions) and anions (negatively charged ions) in the ioni c structure, as shown here for Na and Cl in sodium chlo ride. (b) This
depiction of electron density contours for a single pl ane of atoms in the NaCl structure shows how the lines c onnect points of equal
electron density. Note the relative sizes of the elect ron density contour lines around Cl and Na.
Ionic compounds consist of regular repeating arrays of alternating positively charged cations and negati vely charges anions.
Although it is not possible to measure an ionic radiu s directly for the same reason it is not possible to d irectly measure an atom’s
radius, it is possible to measure the distance between the nuclei of a cation and an adjacent anion in an ionic comp ound to
determine the ionic radius (the radius of a cation or anion) of one or both. As illustrated in Figure, t he internuclear distance
corresponds to the sum of the radii of the cation and anion. A variety of methods have been developed to divide the experimen tally
measured distance proportionally between the smaller cation and larger anion. These methods produce sets of ionic radii that are
internally consistent from one ionic compound to anot her, although each method gives slightly different v alues. For example, the
radius of the Na ion is essentially the same in NaCl a nd Na S, as long as the same method is used to measure it. Thus despite
minor differences due to methodology, certain trends c an be observed.
A comparison of ionic radii with atomic radii (Figure) shows that a cation, having lost an electron, is always smaller than its
parent neutral atom, and an anion, having gained an ele ctron, is always larger than the parent neutral atom. When one or more
electrons is removed from a neutral atom, two things happen: (1) repulsions between electrons in the same pr incipal shell decrease
because fewer electrons are present, and (2) the effe ctive nuclear charge felt by the remaining electron s increases because there areExercise
+2

5.2.3.6 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170018fewer electrons to shield one another from the nucleu s. Consequently, the size of the region of space occ upied by electrons
decreases and the ion shrinks (compare Li at 167 pm with Li at 76 pm). If different numbers of electrons c an be removed to
produce ions with different charges, the ion with the greatest positive charge is the smallest (compare Fe at 78 pm with Fe at
64.5 pm). Conversely, adding one or more electrons to a neutral atom causes electron–electron repulsions t o increase and the
effective nuclear charge to decrease, so the size of the probability region increases and the ion expand s (compare F at 42 pm with
F at 133 pm).
Figure: Ionic Radii (in Picometers) of the Most Common Ionic States of the s-, p-, and d-Block Elements.Gray circles
indicate the sizes of the ions shown; colored circles in dicate the sizes of the neutral atoms. Source: Ionic r adius data from R. D.
Shannon, “Revised effective ionic radii and systematic studies of interatomic distances in halides and chalcoge nides,” Acta
Crystallographica 32, no. 5 (1976): 751–767.
Cations are always smaller than the neutral atom and anions are always larger.
Because most elements form either a cation or an an ion but not both, there are few opportunities to comp are the sizes of a cation
and an anion derived from the same neutral atom. A few compounds of sodium, however, contain the Na ion, allo wing comparison
of its size with that of the far more familiar Na ion, which is found in many compounds. The radius of sodium in each of its three
known oxidation states is given in Table. All three sp ecies have a nuclear charge of +11, but they contai n 10 (Na), 11 (Na),
and 12 (Na) electrons. The Na ion is significantly sma ller than the neutral Na atom because the 3 s electron has been removed to
give a closed shell with n = 2. The Na ion is larger than the parent Na atom bec ause the additional electron produces a 3 s valence
electron configuration, while the nuclear charge remai ns the same.
Table: Experimentally Measured Values for the Radius of Sodium in Its Three Known Oxidation States
Na Na Na
Electron Configuration 1 s2s2p 1s2s2p3s 1s2s2p3s
Radius (pm) 102 154* 202
*The metallic radius measured for Na(s). †Source: M. J. Wagner and J. L. Dye, “Alkalides, Electrides, and Expa nded Metals,” Annual
Review of Materials Science 23 (1993): 225–253.+
2+ 3+
+ 0
− + 1
− 2
+ 0 −
2 2 6 2 2 6 1 2 2 6 2

5.2.3.7 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170018Ionic radii follow the same vertical trend as atomic radii; that is, for ions with the same charge, the ioni c radius increases going
down a column. The reason is the same as for atomic ra dii: shielding by filled inner shells produces litt le change in the effective
nuclear charge felt by the outermost electrons. Agai n, principal shells with larger values of n lie at successively greater distances
from the nucleus.
Because elements in different columns tend to form i ons with different charges, it is not possible to comp are ions of the same
charge across a row of the periodic table. Instead, el ements that are next to each other tend to form ions with the same number of
electrons but with different overall charges because of their different atomic numbers. Such a set of specie s is known as an
isoelectronic series. For example, the isoelectronic series of species with t he neon closed-shell configuration (1 s2s2p) is shown
in Table.
The sizes of the ions in this series decrease smooth ly from N to Al. All six of the ions contain 10 elect rons in the 1 s, 2s, and 2 p
orbitals, but the nuclear charge varies from +7 (N) t o +13 (Al). As the positive charge of the nucleus inc reases while the number of
electrons remains the same, there is a greater electro static attraction between the electrons and the nucl eus, which causes a decrease
in radius. Consequently, the ion with the greatest nucle ar charge (Al) is the smallest, and the ion with the sm allest nuclear charge
(N) is the largest. The neon atom in this isoelectron ic series is not listed in Table, because neon forms no covalent or ionic
compounds and hence its radius is difficult to measure.
Table: Radius of Ions with the Neon Closed-Shell Elec tron Configuration. Source: R. D. Shannon, “Revised effective ionic radii and
systematic studies of interatomic distances in halides and chalcogenides,” Acta Crystallographica 32, no. 5 (19 76): 751–767.
Ion Radius (pm) Atomic Number
N 146 7
O 140 8
F 133 9
Na 98 11
Mg 79 12
Al 57 13
Based on their positions in the periodic table, arrange these ions in order of increasing radius: Cl, K, S, and Se.
Given: four ions
Asked for: order by increasing radius
Strategy:
A. Determine which ions form an isoelectronic series. Of tho se ions, predict their relative sizes based on their nuc lear charges.
For ions that do not form an isoelectronic series, locate t heir positions in the periodic table.
B. Determine the relative sizes of the ions based on thei r principal quantum numbers n and their locations within a row.
Solution:
A We see that S and Cl are at the right of the third r ow, while K and Se are at the far left and right ends of the fourth row,
respectively. K, Cl, and S form an isoelectronic seri es with the [Ar] closed-shell electron configuration; t hat is, all three
ions contain 18 electrons but have different nuclea r charges. Because K has the greatest nuclear charge (Z = 19), its radius is2 2 6
3− 3+
3+
3−
3−
2−
2+
3+
Example
− + 2− 2−
+ − 2−

5.2.3.8 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170018smallest, and S with Z = 16 has the largest radius. Because selenium is d irectly below sulfur, we expect the Se ion to be
even larger than S.
B The order must therefore be K < Cl < S < Se.
Based on their positions in the periodic table, arrange these ions in order of increasing size: Br, Ca, Rb, and Sr.
Answer
Ca < Sr < Rb < Br
Summary
Ionic radii share the same vertical trend as atomic r adii, but the horizontal trends differ due to diffe rences in ionic charges. A variety
of methods have been established to measure the size o f a single atom or ion. The covalent atomic radius (r) is half the
internuclear distance in a molecule with two identica l atoms bonded to each other, whereas the metallic atomic radius (r) is
defined as half the distance between the nuclei of two adjacent atoms in a metallic element. The van der Waals radius (r) of an
element is half the internuclear distance between two nonbonded atoms in a solid. Atomic radii decrease from left to right across a
row because of the increase in effective nuclear cha rge due to poor electron screening by other electron s in the same principal shell.
Moreover, atomic radii increase from top to bottom down a column because the effective nuclear charge rema ins relatively constant
as the principal quantum number increases. The ionic radii of cations and anions are always smaller or larger, respectively, than the
parent atom due to changes in electron–electron rep ulsions, and the trends in ionic radius parallel tho se in atomic size. A
comparison of the dimensions of atoms or ions that have the same number of electrons but different nuc lear charges, called an
isoelectronic series, shows a clear correlation between increasing nuclear ch arge and decreasing size.
Contributors and Attributions
Modified by Joshua Halpern (Howard University)
5.2.3: Sizes of Atoms and Ions is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.2− 2−
2−
+ − 2− 2−
Exercise
− 2+ + 2+
2+ 2+ + −
cov
met
vdW

5.2.4.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1700195.2.4: Ionization Energy
To correlate ionization energies with the chemistry of th e elements
We have seen that when elements react, they often gai n or lose enough electrons to achieve the valence ele ctron configuration of
the nearest noble gas. Why is this so? In this sectio n, we develop a more quantitative approach to predict ing such reactions by
examining periodic trends in the energy changes that accompany ion formation.
Ionization Energies
Because atoms do not spontaneously lose electrons, energy is required to remove an electron from an at om to form a cation.
Chemists define the ionization energy () of an elem ent as the amount of energy needed to remove an elect ron from the gaseous
atom in its ground state. is therefore the energy re quired for the reaction
Because an input of energy is required, the ionizat ion energy is always positive () for the reaction as written in Equation
. Larger values of I mean that the electron is more tightly bound to th e atom and harder to remove. Typical units for
ionization energies are kilojoules/mole (kJ/mol) or ele ctron volts (eV):
If an atom possesses more than one electron, the amo unt of energy needed to remove successive electrons increases steadily. We
can define a first ionization energy (), a second io nization energy (), and in general an nth ionization energy () according to
the following reactions:
Values for the ionization energies of and listed in Table show that successive ionization energies for an element
increase as they go; that is, it takes more energy to remove the second electron from an atom than the f irst, and so forth. There are
two reasons for this trend. First, the second electron i s being removed from a positively charged species rat her than a neutral one,
so in accordance with Coulomb’s law, more energy is r equired. Second, removing the first electron reduces the repulsive forces
among the remaining electrons, so the attraction of th e remaining electrons to the nucleus is stronger.
Successive ionization energies for an element increase.
Table: Ionization Energies (in kJ/mol) for Removing Successive Electrons from Li and Be. Source: Data from CRC Handbook of
Chemistry and Physics (2004).
ReactionElectronic
TransitionReactionElectronic
Transition
I = 520.2 I = 899.5
I = 7298.2 I = 1757.1
I = 11,815.0 I = 14,848.8
I = 21,006.6
The increase in successive ionization energies, howev er, is not linear, but increases drastically when remo ving electrons in lower
orbitals closer to the nucleus. The most important con sequence of the values listed in Table is that the c hemistry of isLearning Objectives
1 1
2 2
3 3

5.2.4.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170019dominated by the ion, while the chemistry of is do minated by the +2 oxidation state. The energy requir ed to remove the
second electron from:
is more than 10 times greater than the energy neede d to remove the first electron. Similarly, the energy required to remove the third
electron from:
is about 15 times greater than the energy needed to remove the first electron and around 8 times greate r than the energy required to
remove the second electron. Both and have 1 s closed-shell configurations, and much more energy i s required to remove
an electron from the 1 s core than from the 2 s valence orbital of the same element. The chemical consequences are enormous:
lithium (and all the alkali metals) forms compounds with the 1+ ion but not the 2+ or 3+ ions. Similarly, beryllium (and all the
alkaline earth metals) forms compounds with the 2+ io n but not the 3+ or 4+ ions. The energy required to remove electrons from a
filled core is prohibitively large and simply cannot be a chieved in normal chemical reactions.
The energy required to remove electrons from a filled core is prohibi tively large under
normal reaction conditions.
Ionization Energies of s- and p-Block Elements
Ionization energies of the elements in the third ro w of the periodic table exhibit the same pattern as those of and (Table
): successive ionization energies increase steadily a s electrons are removed from the valence orbitals (3 s or 3 p, in this case),
followed by an especially large increase in ionizati on energy when electrons are removed from filled core levels as indicated by the
bold diagonal line in Table. Thus in the third row o f the periodic table, the largest increase in ioniza tion energy corresponds
to removing the fourth electron from, the fifth el ectron from Si, and so forth—that is, removing an elect ron from an ion that has
the valence electron configuration of the preceding noble gas. This pattern explains why the chemistry of the elements normally
involves only valence electrons. Too much energy is re quired to either remove or share the inner electrons.
Table: Successive Ionization Energies (in kJ/mol) for t he Elements in the Third Row of the Periodic Table.Sou rce: Data from CRC
Handbook of Chemistry and Physics (2004).
Element
Na 495.8 4562.4 * — — — — —
Mg 737.7 1450.7 7732.7 — — — —
Al 577.4.4 1816.7 2744.8 11,577.4.4 — — —
Si 786.5 1577.1 3231.6 4355.5 16,090.6 — —
S 999.6 2251.8 3357 4556.2 7004.3 8495.8 27,107.4.3
Cl 1251.2 2297.7 3822 5158.6 6540 9362 11,018.2
Ar 1520.6 2665.9 3931 5771 7238 8781.0 11,995.3
*Inner-shell electron
From their locations in the periodic table, predict which o f these elements has the highest fourth ionization energy: B, C, or N.
Given: three elements
Asked for: element with highest fourth ionization energy
Strategy:2
Example: Highest Fourth Ionization Energy

5.2.4.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170019a. List the electron configuration of each element.
b. Determine whether electrons are being removed from a f illed or partially filled valence shell. Predict which ele ment has the
highest fourth ionization energy, recognizing that the highest energy corresponds to the removal of electrons fro m a filled
electron core.
Solution:
A These elements all lie in the second row of the periodic table and have the following electron configurations:
B: [He]2 s2p
C: [He]2 s2p
N: [He]2 s2p
B The fourth ionization energy of an element () is define d as the energy required to remove the fourth electron:
Because carbon and nitrogen have four and five vale nce electrons, respectively, their fourth ionization energies correspond to
removing an electron from a partially filled valenc e shell. The fourth ionization energy for boron, howeve r, corresponds to
removing an electron from the filled 1 s subshell. This should require much more energy. The a ctual values are as follows: B,
25,026 kJ/mol; C, 6223 kJ/mol; and N, 7475 kJ/mol.
From their locations in the periodic table, predict whi ch of these elements has the lowest second ionizatio n energy: Sr, Rb, or
Ar.
Answer
The first column of data in Table shows that first i onization energies tend to increase across the third row of the periodic
table. This is because the valence electrons do not scre en each other very well, allowing the effective nuclea r charge to increase
steadily across the row. The valence electrons are t herefore attracted more strongly to the nucleus, so at omic sizes decrease and
ionization energies increase. These effects represent two sides of the same coin: stronger electrostatic inte ractions between the
electrons and the nucleus further increase the energy requ ired to remove the electrons.
Figure: A Plot of Periodic Variation of First Ionizatio n Energy with Atomic Number for the First Six Rows of t he Periodic
Table. There is a decrease in ionization energy withi n a group (most easily seen here for groups 1 and 18).
However, the first ionization energy decreases at Al ([Ne] 3s3p) and at S ([Ne]3 s3p). The electron configurations of these
"exceptions" provide the answer why. The electrons in al uminum’s filled 3 s subshell are better at screening the 3 p electron than
they are at screening each other from the nuclear ch arge, so the s electrons penetrate closer to the nucleus than the p electron does2 1
2 2
2 3
Exercise: Lowest Second Ionization Energy
2 1 2 4
2 1

5.2.4.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170019and the p electron is more easily removed. The decrease at S o ccurs because the two electrons in the same p orbital repel each
other. This makes the S atom slightly less stable than would otherwise be expected, as is true of all the group 16 ele ments.
Figure: First Ionization Energies of the s-, p-, d-, and f-Block Elements
The first ionization energies of the elements in the first six rows of the periodic table are plotted in Figure 7.4.1 and are presented
numerically and graphically in Figure. These figures i llustrate three important trends:
1. The changes seen in the second (Li to Ne), fourth (K to Kr), fifth (Rb to Xe), and sixth (Cs to Rn) rows of the s and p blocks
follow a pattern similar to the pattern described for the th ird row of the periodic table. The transition metals are included in the
fourth, fifth, and sixth rows, however, and the lanthanides ar e included in the sixth row. The first ionization energies o f the
transition metals are somewhat similar to one another, as a re those of the lanthanides. Ionization energies increas e from left to
right across each row, with discrepancies occurring at ns np (group 13), ns np (group 16), and ns(n − 1) d (group 12).
2. First ionization energies generally decrease down a colum n. Although the principal quantum number n increases down a
column, filled inner shells are effective at screening the valence electrons, so there is a relatively small increa se in the effective
nuclear charge. Consequently, the atoms become larger a s they acquire electrons. Valence electrons that are fart her from the
nucleus are less tightly bound, making them easier to remo ve, which causes ionization energies to decrease. A larger radius
typically corresponds to a lower ionization energy.
3. Because of the first two trends, the elements that form positive ions most easily (have the lowest ionization energ ies) lie in the
lower left corner of the periodic table, whereas those th at are hardest to ionize lie in the upper right corner o f the periodic table.
Consequently, ionization energies generally increase diagonally from lower left (Cs) to upper right (He).
The darkness of the shading inside the cells of the tabl e indicates the relative magnitudes of the ionization energies. Elements in
gray have undetermined first ionization energies. Sou rce: Data from CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics (2004).2 1 2 4 2 10

5.2.4.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170019Generally, increases diagonally from the lower left of the periodic t able to the upper
right.
Gallium (Ga), which is the first element following the fi rst row of transition metals, has the following electro n configuration:
[Ar]4 s3d4p. Its first ionization energy is significantly lower th an that of the immediately preceding element, zinc, because the
filled 3 d subshell of gallium lies inside the 4 p subshell, shielding the single 4 p electron from the nucleus. Experiments have
revealed something of even greater interest: the seco nd and third electrons that are removed when gallium is ionized come from the
4s orbital, not the 3 d subshell. The chemistry of gallium is dominated by the resulting Ga ion, with its [Ar]3 d electron
configuration. This and similar electron configurat ions are particularly stable and are often encounter ed in the heavier p-block
elements. They are sometimes referred to as pseudo noble gas configurations. In fact, for elements that exhibit these
configurations, no chemical compounds are known in which electrons are re moved from the (n − 1)d filled subshell.
Ionization Energies of Transition Metals & Lanthanides
As we noted, the first ionization energies of the transi tion metals and the lanthanides change very little ac ross each row. Differences
in their second and third ionization energies are al so rather small, in sharp contrast to the pattern se en with the s- and p-block
elements. The reason for these similarities is that the transition metals and the lanthanides form cati ons by losing the ns electrons
before the (n − 1) d or (n − 2) f electrons, respectively. This means that transition metal cations have (n − 1) d valence electron
configurations, and lanthanide cations have (n − 2) f valence electron configurations. Because the (n − 1) d and (n − 2) f shells are
closer to the nucleus than the ns shell, the (n − 1) d and (n − 2) f electrons screen the ns electrons quite effectively, reducing the
effective nuclear charge felt by the ns electrons. As Z increases, the increasing positive charge is largely canceled by the electrons
added to the (n − 1) d or (n − 2) f orbitals.
That the ns electrons are removed before the (n − 1) d or (n − 2) f electrons may surprise you because the orbitals were fil led in the
reverse order. In fact, the ns, the (n − 1) d, and the (n − 2) f orbitals are so close to one another in energy, and interpenetrate one
another so extensively, that very small changes in t he effective nuclear charge can change the order of their energy levels. As the d
orbitals are filled, the effective nuclear charge ca uses the 3 d orbitals to be slightly lower in energy than the 4 s orbitals. The [Ar]3 d
electron configuration of Ti tells us that the 4 s electrons of titanium are lost before the 3 d electrons; this is confirmed by
experiment. A similar pattern is seen with the lanthanid es, producing cations with an (n − 2) f valence electron configuration.
Because their first, second, and third ionization en ergies change so little across a row, these elements hav e important horizontal
similarities in chemical properties in addition to t he expected vertical similarities. For example, all the first-row transition metals
except scandium form stable compounds as M ions, where as the lanthanides primarily form compounds in which they exist as
M ions.
Use their locations in the periodic table to predict which element has the lowest first ionization energy: Ca, K, Mg, Na, Rb, or
Sr.
Given: six elements
Asked for: element with lowest first ionization energy
Strategy:
Locate the elements in the periodic table. Based on trends in ionization energies across a row and down a column, identify the
element with the lowest first ionization energy.
Solution:
These six elements form a rectangle in the two far-lef t columns of the periodic table. Because we know that io nization energies
increase from left to right in a row and from bottom to top of a column, we can predict that the element at the bottom left of the
rectangle will have the lowest first ionization energy: R b.2 10 1
2 10 3+ 10
n
n
2+
n
2+
3+
Example: Lowest First Ionization Energy

5.2.4.6 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170019Use their locations in the periodic table to predict which element has the highest first ionization energy: As, Bi, Ge, Pb, Sb, or
Sn.
Answer
Summary
The tendency of an element to lose electrons is one of the most important factors in determining the ki nd of compounds it forms.
Periodic behavior is most evident for ionization energy (I), the energy required to remove an electron from a gaseous atom. The
energy required to remove successive electrons from an atom increases steadily, with a substantial increase oc curring with the
removal of an electron from a filled inner shell. C onsequently, only valence electrons can be removed i n chemical reactions,
leaving the filled inner shell intact. Ionization e nergies explain the common oxidation states observed for the elements. Ionization
energies increase diagonally from the lower left of t he periodic table to the upper right. Minor deviation s from this trend can be
explained in terms of particularly stable electroni c configurations, called pseudo noble gas configurations, in either the parent
atom or the resulting ion.
5.2.4: Ionization Energy is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.Exercise: Highest First Ionization Energy

5.2.5.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1700205.2.5: Electron Affinities
To master the concept of electron affinity as a measure of t he energy required to add an electron to an atom or io n.
To recognize the inverse relationship of ionization ene rgies and electron affinities
The electron affinity () of an element is defined as the energy change that occurs when an electron is added to a gaseous atom
or ion:
Unlike ionization energies, which are always positive fo r a neutral atom because energy is required to remov e an electron, electron
affinities can be negative (energy is released when an electron is added), positive (energy must be added to the system to produce
an anion), or zero (the process is energetically ne utral). This sign convention is consistent with a nega tive value corresponded to the
energy change for an exothermic process, which is one in which heat is released (Figure).
Figure: A Plot of Periodic Variation of Electron Affinity with Atomic Number for the First Six Rows of the Periodic Table.
Notice that electron affinities can be both negative and positive. from Robert J. Lancashire (University of the We st Indies).
The chlorine atom has the most negative electron aff inity of any element, which means that more energy is released when an
electron is added to a gaseous chlorine atom than to an atom of any other element:
In contrast, beryllium does not form a stable anion, so its effective electron affinity is
Nitrogen is unique in that it has an electron affinit y of approximately zero. Adding an electron neither r eleases nor requires a
significant amount of energy:
Generally, electron affinities become more negative across a row of the periodic table.
In general, electron affinities of the main-group el ements become less negative as we proceed down a column. This is because as n
increases, the extra electrons enter orbitals that are inc reasingly far from the nucleus.Learning Objectives

5.2.5.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170020
Figure: Electron Affinities (in kJ/mol) of the s-, p-, and d-Bl ock Elements.
Atoms with the largest radii, which have the lowest ioniza tion energies (affinity for their own valence electr ons), also have the
lowest affinity for an added electron. There are, however, two major exceptions to this trend:
1. The electron affinities of elements B through F in the second row of the periodic table are less negative than those of the
elements immediately below them in the third row. Apparen tly, the increased electron–electron repulsions experien ced by
electrons confined to the relatively small 2 p orbitals overcome the increased electron–nucleus attr action at short nuclear
distances. Fluorine, therefore, has a lower affinity for an ad ded electron than does chlorine. Consequently, the ele ments of the
third row (n = 3) have the most negative electron affinities. Farther down a column, the attraction for an added electron
decreases because the electron is entering an orbital mo re distant from the nucleus. Electron–electron repulsion s also decrease
because the valence electrons occupy a greater volume of space. These effects tend to cancel one another, so the cha nges in
electron affinity within a family are much smaller tha n the changes in ionization energy.
2. The electron affinities of the alkaline earth metals become more negative from Be to Ba. The energy separat ion between the
filled ns and the empty np subshells decreases with increasing n, so that formation of an anion from the heavier elemen ts
becomes energetically more favorable.2

5.2.5.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170020
Figure: There are many more exceptions to the trends across rows and down columns than with first ionization energies.
Elements that do not form stable ions, such as the noble gases, are assigned an effective electron affinity that is greater than or
equal to zero. Elements for which no data are availabl e are shown in gray. Source: Data from Journal of Physi cal and Chemical
Reference Data 28, no. 6 (1999).
The equations for second and higher electron affiniti es are analogous to those for second and higher ionizati on energies:
As we have seen, the first electron affinity can be gr eater than or equal to zero or negative, depending on the electron configuration
of the atom. In contrast, the second electron affinity is always positive because the increased electron–electron repu lsions in a
dianion are far greater than the attraction of the nucleus for the extra electrons. For example, the first electron affinity of oxygen is
−141 kJ/mol, but the second electron affinity is +744 kJ/m ol:
Thus the formation of a gaseous oxide () ion is energetical ly quite unfavorable (estimated by adding both steps):
Similarly, the formation of all common dianions (such as) or trianions (such as) is energetically unfavo rable in the gas
phase.
While first electron affinities can be negative, positive, or zero, se cond electron affinities
are always positive.
If energy is required to form both positively charge d cations and monatomic polyanions, why do ionic compou nds such as,
, and form at all? The key factor in the formation of stable ionic compounds is the favorable electros tatic interactions
between the cations and the anions in the crystalline salt.

5.2.5.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170020Based on their positions in the periodic table, which of Sb, Se, or Te would you predict to have the most neg ative electron
affinity?
Given: three elements
Asked for: element with most negative electron affinity
Strategy:
A. Locate the elements in the periodic table. Use the trends in electron affinities going down a column for elements in the
same group. Similarly, use the trends in electron affiniti es from left to right for elements in the same row.
B. Place the elements in order, listing the element with the most negative electron affinity first.
Solution:
A We know that electron affinities become less negati ve going down a column (except for the anomalously lo w electron
affinities of the elements of the second row), so we ca n predict that the electron affinity of Se is more n egative than that of Te.
We also know that electron affinities become more ne gative from left to right across a row, and that the group 15 elements tend
to have values that are less negative than expected. Because Sb is located to the left of Te and belongs t o group 15, we predict
that the electron affinity of Te is more negative t han that of Sb. The overall order is Se < Te < Sb, so Se h as the most negative
electron affinity among the three elements.
Based on their positions in the periodic table, which of Rb, Sr, or Xe would you predict to most likely form a gaseous anion?
Answer
Rb
Summary
The electron affinity (EA) of an element is the energy change that occurs when an electron is added to a gaseous atom to give an
anion. In general, elements with the most negative el ectron affinities (the highest affinity for an added electron) are those with the
smallest size and highest ionization energies and are l ocated in the upper right corner of the periodic table.
5.2.5: Electron Affinities is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.Example: Contrasting Electron Affinities of Sb, Se, and Te
Exercise: Contrasting Electron Affinities of Rb, Sr, and Xe

5.2.6.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1700215.2.6: Metals, Nonmetals, and Metalloids
To understand the basic properties separating Metals f rom Nonmetals and Metalloids
An element is the simplest form of matter that canno t be split into simpler substances or built from sim pler substances by any
ordinary chemical or physical method. There are 118 elements known to us, out of which 92 are naturally o ccurring, while the rest
have been prepared artificially. Elements are furthe r classified into metals, non-metals, and metalloids based on their properties,
which are correlated with their placement in the periodic table.
Table: Characteristic properties of metallic and non -metallic elements:
Metallic Elements Nonmetallic elements
Distinguishing luster (shine) Non-lustrous, various colors
Malleable and ductile (flexible) as solids Brittle, ha rd or soft
Conduct heat and electricity Poor conductors
Metallic oxides are basic, ionic Nonmetallic oxides are acidic, covalent
Form cations in aqueous solution Form anions, oxyanions in aqueous solution
Metals
With the exception of hydrogen, all elements that for m positive ions by losing electrons during chemical reactions are called
metals. Thus metals are electropositive elements with relatively low ionization energies. They are character ized by bright luster,
hardness, ability to resonate sound and are excellent conductors of heat and electricity. Metals are solids under normal conditions
except for Mercury.
Physical Properties of Metals
Metals are lustrous, malleable, ductile, good conductors of heat and electricity. Other properties include:
State: Metals are solids at room temperature with the exception o f mercury, which is liquid at room temperature (Gallium is
liquid on hot days).
Luster: Metals have the quality of reflecting light from thei r surface and can be polished e.g., gold, silver and copper.
Malleability: Metals have the ability to withstand hammering and can be mad e into thin sheets known as foils. For example, a
sugar cube sized chunk of gold can be pounded into a thi n sheet that will cover a football field.
Ductility: Metals can be drawn into wires. For example, 100 g of silver c an be drawn into a thin wire about 200 meters long.
Hardness: All metals are hard except sodium and potassium, which are sof t and can be cut with a knife.
Valency: Metals typically have 1 to 3 electrons in the outermost she ll of their atoms.
Conduction: Metals are good conductors because they have free elec trons. Silver and copper are the two best conductors of
heat and electricity. Lead is the poorest conductor of he at. Bismuth, mercury and iron are also poor conductors
Density: Metals have high density and are very heavy. Iridium and osmium have the highest densities whereas lithium has the
lowest density.
Melting and Boiling Points: Metals have high melting and boiling points. Tungsten has the highest melting and boiling points
whereas mercury has the lowest. Sodium and potassium also have low melting points.
Chemical Properties of Metals
Metals are electropositive elements that generally form basic or amphoteric oxides with oxygen. Other chemical properties include:
Electropositive Character: Metals tend to have low ionization energies, and typically lose electrons (i.e. are oxidized) when
they undergo chemical reactions They normally do not accept electrons. For example:
Alkali metals are always 1 (lose the electron in s subshell)Learning Objectives

5.2.6.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170021Alkaline earth metals are always 2 (lose both electrons in s subshell)
Transition metal ions do not follow an obvious pattern, 2 i s common (lose both electrons in s subshell), and 1 and 3 are
also observed
Compounds of metals with non-metals tend to be ionic in nature. Most metal oxides are basic oxides and diss olve in water to form
metal hydroxides:
Metal oxides exhibit their basic chemical nature by reacting with acids to form metal salts and water:
What is the chemical formula for aluminum oxide?
Solution
Al has a 3+ charge, the oxide ion is, thus.
Would you expect it to be solid, liquid or gas at room tem perature?
Solutions
Oxides of metals are characteristically solid at room temper ature
Write the balanced chemical equation for the reaction of aluminum oxide with nitric acid:
Solution
Metal oxide + acid -> salt + water
Nonmetals
Elements that tend to gain electrons to form anions during chemical reactions are called non-metals. T hese are electronegative
elements with high ionization energies. They are non -lustrous, brittle and poor conductors of heat and el ectricity (except graphite).
Non-metals can be gases, liquids or solids.
Physical Properties of Nonmetals
Physical State: Most of the non-metals exist in two of the three states of matte r at room temperature: gases (oxygen) and solids
(carbon). Only bromine exists as a liquid at room temperat ure.
Non-Malleable and Ductile: Non-metals are very brittle, and cannot be rolled into wi res or pounded into sheets.
Conduction: They are poor conductors of heat and electricity.
Luster: These have no metallic luster and do not reflect light.
Melting and Boiling Points: The melting points of non-metals are generally lower than metals, but are highly variable.+
Example
Example
Example

5.2.6.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170021Seven non-metals exist under standard conditions as diatomic molecules:,,,,,,.
Chemical Properties of Nonmetals
Non-metals have a tendency to gain or share electrons with other atoms. They are electronegative in charac ter. Nonmetals, when
reacting with metals, tend to gain electrons (typically attaining noble gas electron configuration) and become anions:
Compounds composed entirely of nonmetals are covalen t substances. They generally form acidic or neutral oxides with oxygen
that that dissolve in water to form acids:
As you may know, carbonated water is slightly acidic (carbo nic acid).
Nonmetal oxides can combine with bases to form salts.
Metalloids
Metalloids have properties intermediate between the met als and nonmetals. Metalloids are useful in the semicon ductor industry.
Metalloids are all solid at room temperature. They ca n form alloys with other metals. Some metalloids, such as silicon and
germanium, can act as electrical conductors under t he right conditions, thus they are called semiconduct ors. Silicon for example
appears lustrous, but is not malleable nor ductile (it is brittle - a characteristic of some nonmetals). It is a muc h poorer conductor of
heat and electricity than the metals. The physical properties of metalloids tend to be metallic, but th eir chemical properties tend to
be non-metallic. The oxidation number of an element in this group can range from +5 to -2, depending on the group in which it is
located.
Table: Elements categorized into metals, non-metals a nd metalloids.
Metals Non-metals Metalloids
Gold Oxygen Silicon
Silver Carbon Boron
Copper Hydrogen Arsenic
Iron Nitrogen Antimony
Mercury Sulfur Germanium
Zinc Phosphorus
Trends in Metallic and Nonmetallic Character
Metallic character is strongest for the elements in t he leftmost part of the periodic table, and tends to decrease as we move to the
right in any period (nonmetallic character increase s with increasing electronegativity and ionization e nergy values). Within any
group of elements (columns), the metallic character increases from top to bottom (the electronegativity and ionization energy
values generally decrease as we move down a group). This ge neral trend is not necessarily observed with the transi tion metals.

5.2.6.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170021
Contributors and Attributions
Mike Blaber (Florida State University)
Binod Shrestha (University of Lorraine)
5.2.6: Metals, Nonmetals, and Metalloids is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

5.2.7.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1700225.2.7: Group Trends for the Active Metals
The elements within the same group of the periodic t able tend to exhibit similar physical and chemical p roperties. Four major
factors affect reactivity of metals: nuclear charge, atomic radius, shielding effect and sublevel arrangem ent (of electrons). Metal
reactivity relates to ability to lose electrons (ox idize), form basic hydroxides, form ionic compounds with non-metals. In general,
the bigger the atom, the greater the ability to lose electrons. The greater the shielding, the greater t he ability to lose electrons.
Therefore, metallic character increases going down th e table, and decreases going across -- so the most acti ve metal is towards the
left and down.
Group 1: The Alkali Metals
The word "alkali" is derived from an Arabic word meani ng "ashes". Many sodium and potassium compounds were i solated from
wood ashes (and are still occasionally referred to as "soda ash" and "potash"). In the alkali group, as we go down
the group we have elements Lithium (Li), Sodium (Na), Po tassium (K), Rubidium (Rb), Cesium (Cs) and Francium (Fr). Several
physical properties of these elements are compared in Table. These elements have all only one electron in their outermost
shells. All the elements show metallic properties and have va lence +1, hence they give up electron easily.
Table: General Properties of Group I Metals
ElementElectronic
ConfigurationMelting Point (°C) Density (g/cm) Atomic RadiusIonization Energy
(kJ/mol)
Lithium 181 0.53 1.52 520
Sodium 98 0.97 1.86 496
Potassium 63 0.86 2.27 419
Rubidium 39 1.53 2.47 403
Cesium 28 1.88 2.65 376
As we move down the group (from Li to Fr), the following trends are observed (Table):
All have a single electron in an 's' valence orbital
The melting point decreases
The density increases
The atomic radius increases
The ionization energy decreases (first ionization energ y)
The alkali metals have the lowest values of the elements
This represents the relative ease with which the lone elect ron in the outer 's' orbital can be removed.
The alkali metals are very reactive, readily losing 1 electron t o form an ion with a 1+ charge:
Due to this reactivity, the alkali metals are found i n nature only as compounds. The alkali metals combine directly with most
nonmetals:
React with hydrogen to form solid hydrides
(Note: hydrogen is present in the metal hydride as the hydride H ion)
React with sulfur to form solid sulfides3

5.2.7.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170022React with chlorine to form solid chlorides
Alkali metals react with water to produce hydrogen gas and alkali metal hydroxides; this is a very exotherm ic reaction (Figure
Figure: A small piece of potassium metal explodes as it reacts with water. (CC SA-BY 3.0; Tavoromann)
The reaction between alkali metals and oxygen is more complex:
A common reaction is to form metal oxides which contai n the O ion
Other alkali metals can form metal peroxides (contains O ion)
K, Rb and Cs can also form superoxides (O ion)
The color of a chemical is produced when a valence e lectron in an atom is excited from one energy level t o another by visible
radiation. In this case, the particular frequency o f light that excites the electron is absorbed. Thus, the remaining light that you
see is white light devoid of one or more wavelengths (thus appearing colored). Alkali metals, having lost thei r outermost
electrons, have no electrons that can be excited by v isible radiation. Alkali metal salts and their aqueous solution are colorless
unless they contain a colored anion.
When alkali metals are placed in a flame the ions ar e reduced (gain an electron) in the lower part of th e flame. The electron is
excited (jumps to a higher orbital) by the high tem perature of the flame. When the excited electron fal ls back down to a lower
orbital a photon is released. The transition of the va lence electron of sodium from the 3p down to the 3s subshell results in
release of a photon with a wavelength of 589 nm (yellow)
Flame colors:
Lithium: crimson red2222Colors via Absorption
Colors via Emission

5.2.7.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170022Sodium: yellow
Potassium: lilac
Group 2: The Alkaline Earth Metals
Compared with the alkali metals, the alkaline earth me tals are typically harder, more dense, melt at a high er temperature. The first
ionization energies () of the alkaline earth metals are not as low as the alkali metals. The alkaline ea rth metals are therefore less
reactive than the alkali metals (Be and Mg are the l east reactive of the alkaline earth metals). Several p hysical properties of these
elements are compared in Table.
Table: General Properties of Group 2 Metals
ElementElectronic
ConfigurationMelting Point (°C) Density (g/cm) Atomic RadiusIonization Energy
(kJ/mol)
Beryllium 1278 1.85 1.52 899
Magnesium 649 1.74 1.60 738
Calcium 839 1.54 1.97 590
Strontium 769 2.54 2.15 549
Barium 725 3.51 2.17 503
Calcium, and elements below it, react readily with water at r oom temperature:
The tendency of the alkaline earths to lose their two valence electrons is demonstrated in the reactivity of Mg towards chlorine gas
and oxygen:
The 2+ ions of the alkaline earth metals have a nobl e gas like electron configuration and are thus form colorless or white
compounds (unless the anion is itself colored). Flame colors:
Calcium: brick red
Strontium: crimson red
Barium: green
Contributors and Attributions
Mike Blaber (Florida State University)
5.2.7: Group Trends for the Active Metals is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.3

5.2.8.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1700235.2.8: Group Trends for Selected Nonmetals
To gain a descriptive understanding of the chemical pro perties of Hydrogen, the group 16, 17 and 18 elements.
Non-metallic character is the ability to be reduced (be an oxidizing agent), form acidic hydroxides, for m covalent compounds with
non-metals. These characteristics increase with a larg er nuclear charge and smaller radius, with no increase in shielding. The most
active non-metal would be the one farthest up and to the r ight -- not including the noble gases (non-reactive.)
Hydrogen
Hydrogen has a 1 s electron configuration and is placed above the alka li metal group. Hydrogen is a non-metal, which occurs as a
gas (H) under normal conditions.
Its ionization energy is considerably higher (due to lack of shielding, and thus higher) than the rest of the Group 1 m etals
and is more like the nonmetals
Hydrogen generally reacts with other nonmetals to form molecular compounds (typically highly exothermic)
Hydrogen reacts with active metals to form metal hydride s which contain the H hydride ion:
Hydrogen can also lose an electron to yield the aqueous hydronium ion.
Group 16: The Oxygen Family
As we proceed down group 16 the elements become more metalli c in nature:
Oxygen is a gas, the rest are solids
Oxygen, sulfur and selenium are nonmetals
Tellurium is a metalloid with some metal properties
Polonium is a metal
Oxygen can be found in two molecular forms, O and O (o zone). These two forms of oxygen are called allotropes (different forms
of the same element in the same state)
the reaction is endothermic, thus ozone is less stable that O
Oxygen has a great tendency to attract electrons from othe r elements (i.e. to "oxidize" them)
Oxygen in combination with metals is almost always present as t he O ion (which has noble gas electronic configuration and is
particularly stable)
Two other oxygen anions are observed: peroxide (O) and superoxide (O)
Sulfur
Sulfur also exists in several allotropic forms, the mo st common stable allotrope is the yellow solid S (an 8 member ring of sulfur
atoms). Like oxygen, sulfur has a tendency to gain electrons from other elements, and to form sulfides (which contain the S
ion). This is particular true for the active metals:
Note: most sulfur in nature is present as a metal-sulfur compound. Sulfur chemistry is more complex than that of o xygen.
Group 17: The Halogens
"Halogen" is derived from the Greek meaning "salt former s"
Astatine is radioactive and rare, and some of its propertie s are unknownLearning Objectives
2 3
2-

5.2.8.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170023All the halogens are nonmetals
Each element consists of diatomic molecules under standar d conditions
Colors of diatomic halogens: (not flame colors)
Fluorine: pale yellow
Chlorine: yellow green
Bromine: reddish brown
Iodine: violet vapor
The halogens have some of the most negative electron affinities (i.e. large exothermic process in gaining a n electron from another
element)
Fluorine and chlorine are the most reactive halogens (h ighest electron affinities). Fluorine will remove electrons from almost
any substance (including several of the noble gases from Group 18).
The chemistry of the halogens is dominated by their tende ncy to gain electrons from other elements (forming a halid e ion)
In 1992, 22.3 billion pounds of chlorine was produced. Both chlorine and sodium can be produced by electrolysis of molten
sodium chloride (table salt). The electricity is use d to strip electrons from chloride ions and transfer them to sodium ions to produce
chlorine gas and solid sodium metal
Chlorine reacts slowly with water to produce hydrochloric aci d and hypochlorous acid:
Hypochlorous acid is a disinfectant, thus chlorine is a useful addition to swimming pool water
The halogens react with most metals to form ionic halides:
Group 18: The Noble Gases
Nonmetals
Gases at room temperature
monoatomic
completely filled 's' and 'p' subshells
large first ionization energy, but this decreases somewhat as we move down the group
Rn is highly radioactive and some of its properties ar e unknown
They are exceptionally unreactive. It was reasoned tha t if any of these were reactive, they would most likel y be Rn, Xe or Kr where
the first ionization energies were lower.
In order to react, they would have to be combined with an element which had a high tendency to remove elec trons from other
atoms. Such as fluorine.
Compounds of noble gases to date:

only one compound with Kr has been made
No compounds observed with He, Ne, or Ar; they are truly iner t gases.Note
Note

5.2.8.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170023Contributors and Attributions
Mike Blaber (Florida State University)
5.2.8: Group Trends for Selected Nonmetals is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
LibreTexts.

1SECTION OVERVIEW
Topic F- Molecular Structure
WHAT YOU SHOULD BE ABLE TO DO WHEN YOU HA VE FINISHED THIS TOPIC:
General Covalent Bonding Concepts
1. Understand the relationship between potential energy an d internuclear distance.
2. Understand a covalent bond in terms of potential energy.
3. Recognize that there are two models used to describe c ovalent bonding: (1) valence bond theory and (2) molec ular orbital
theory.
Localized Electron Model of Covalent Bonding
4. Draw reasonable Lewis structures for small molecules a nd common polyatomic ions.
5. Determine bond order.
6. Determine bond polarity.
7. Apply the concept of bond energies to estimate H for any reaction.
8. Understand the relationship between bond order, bond d istance, and bond energy.
9. Use VSEPR Theory to predict the 3D molecular geometry.
10. Determine if a molecule is polar.
11. Use resonance structures to show electron delocalizatio n. Use formal charges to determine major and minor resona nce
contributors.
12. Use atomic orbital overlap to model a covalent bond. (Valence Bond Theory)
13. Use orbital hybridization to rationalize orbital geom etry with the observed bond angles.
14. Identify and describe a sigma bond and a pi bond in t erms of orbital overlap.
15. Overall, predict the following for a given Lewis structur e:
The molecular geometry for a central bonding atom, inc luding typical bond angles.
Whether the molecular geometry is likely to be distorted.
The orbital geometry and corresponding orbital hybridiz ation (sp, sp, sp, etc.) that will align with the bond
geometry for a central bonding atom.
Whether or not the molecule is polar.
Delocalized Electron Model of Covalent Bonding
15. Use molecular orbitals to model a covalent bond. (Molecule Orbital Theory)
16. Use MO energy diagrams to determine bond order and magnet ic properties of a molecule.
17. Draw sketches of the molecular orbitals for diatomic molecules that are formed from linear combinations of two atomic
orbitals, and identify each as bonding or antibonding.
6.1: Basic Concepts of Covalent Bonding
6.1.1: Covalent Bonding Fundamentals
6.1.2: Interpreting Lewis Structures
6.1.3: Drawing Lewis Structures
6.1.4: Resonance Lewis Structures
6.1.5: Strength of Covalent Bonds
6.1.6: The VSEPR Model
6.1.7: Molecular PolarityLearning Objectives
2 3

26.1.8: A Different Perspective on Drawing Lewis Structures
6.2: Orbitals and Bonding Theories
6.2.1: Localized Electron Model of Covalent Bonding
6.2.2: Hybrid Atomic Orbitals
6.2.3: Orbital Overlap in Multiple Bonds
6.2.4: Molecular Orbital Theory
Topic F- Molecular Structure is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
6.1: Basic Concepts of Covalent Bonding
6.1.1: Covalent Bonding Fundamentals
6.1.2: Interpreting Lewis Structures
6.1.3: Drawing Lewis Structures
6.1.4: Resonance Lewis Structures
6.1.5: Strength of Covalent Bonds
6.1.6: The VSEPR Model
6.1.7: Molecular Polarity
6.1.8: A Different Perspective on Drawing Lewis Structures

6.1: Basic Concepts of Covalent Bonding is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

6.1.1.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1700286.1.1: Covalent Bonding Fundamentals
Understand the relationship between potential energy and i nternuclear distance.
Understand a covalent bond in terms of potential energy.
Recognize that there are two models used to describe cov alent bonding: valence bond theory and molecular orbit al theory
Why are some substances chemically bonded molecules a nd others are an association of ions? The answer to t his question depends
upon the electronic structures of the atoms and nature of the chemical forces within the compounds. Although there are no sharply
defined boundaries, chemical bonds are typically classi fied into three main types: ionic bonds, covalent bonds, and metallic bonds.
1. Ionic bonds results from electrostatic forces that exist between ions of opposite c harge. These bonds typically involves a metal
with a nonmetal
2. Covalent bonds result from the sharing of electrons between two atoms. The bonds typically involves one nonmetallic eleme nt
with another
3. Metallic bonds These bonds are found in solid metals (copp er, iron, aluminum) with each metal bonded to several neig hboring
groups and bonding electrons free to move throughout th e 3-dimensional structure.
In this chapter, we will focus on covalent bonding.

Covalent Bonding
A covalent bond is the sharing of electrons between two atoms. The electrons are the “glue” that keeps the two atoms
together. When two atoms share electrons, the shared e lectrons create a region of higher electron density b etween the nuclei of the
atoms. This concentration of negative charge pulls t he nuclei together. The nuclei do not get too close to each other, however,
because they repel each other. At some distance, the attra ction and the repulsion balance each other, forming a stable bond.
Figure: The two nuclei (red) are attracted to the high electron density in the center of the molecule (green arro ws), but
repelled by each other (red arrows).

Bond Energies
Fundamentally, atoms form a chemical bond because the overall energy of the bonded atoms is lower than the overall energy of the
original, unbonded atoms. For example, an H molecule h as a lower energy than two H atoms. We can show how the p otential
energy of two atoms depends on the distance between th em by drawing a bond energy diagram. The bond energy diagram for H is
shown below:Learning Objectives

6.1.1.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170028
Figure: Bond energy diagram for two hydrogen atoms as a f unction of internuclear distance.

When charged particles interact, electrostatic forc es determine the potential energy of the system. Accord ing to Coulomb's Law,
the energy of the electrostatic attraction () betwee n two charged particles is proportional to the magnitu de of the charges and
inversely proportional to the internuclear distance be tween the particles ():
where each particle’s charge is represented by the sy mbol Q. If Q and Q have opposite signs (as an electron and a proton, wh ere
Q is −1 for an elecctron and Q is +1 for a proton), then E is negative, which means that energy is released when oppositely
charged particles are brought together from an infi nite distance to form an isolated pair. The opposite is true for like-charged
particles. Figure considers all of the the potential en ergy interactions for the two hydrogen atoms:
proton-electron attraction (E is negative, stabilizing)
electron-electron repulsion (E is positive, destabilizing)
proton-proton repulsion (E is positive, destabilizing)
The total energy of the two-atom system is a sum of t hese these attractive and repulsive interactions. As s hown by the curve in
Figure, when the atoms are very far apart from one a nother, they have no interaction and the energy of t he system is defined
as zero. As the atoms are brought closer together, the stabilizing attraction between electrons and protons dominates. As a result, as
atoms are brought together, energy is released and t he system becomes more stable compared to the infin itely separated atoms.
However, at very short internuclear distances, the rep ulsive electron–electron and proton-proton interacti ons dominate. Note that at
a mid-distance, the diagram shows that the total pote ntial energy of the system reaches a minimum, the poi nt where the electrostatic
repulsions and attractions are balanced. This distance, 74 pm, is called the bond distance (or bond length) of hydrogen. If the
atoms are farther apart, the inward attraction toward the electron density pulls them closer together. If the atoms are closer
together, their mutual repulsion pushes them apart. In pr actice, the atoms vibrate, as if they were connected by a sprin g.
Energy is always released when a bond is formed and correspondingly, it always r equires
energy to break a bond.
The graph in Figure also shows us that the H molecule is 432 kJ/mol more stable than the unbonded atoms (wh ich would
have an energy of 0 kJ/mol). If we wanted to break a mo le of H into hydrogen atoms, we would need to put in 432 kJ of energy:
H (g) 2 H(g) H = 432 kJ
This energy is called the bond dissociation energy (or bond energy) of H.
Bond energies and bond distances depend on the atoms that are bonded together. A dramatic illustration of this is shown by the
graph below, which compares the bond energy diagrams of H a nd I.1 2
1 2
2 2

6.1.1.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170028
Two Models for Covalent Bonding
There are two models that we can use to describe covalent bond ing and how it produces the molecules we observe in nature
Localized Electron Model: assumes that each pair of electrons in a molecule has a specific location and function. Nonbonding
electron pairs are in atomic orbitals; bonding elect ron pairs are found where atomic orbitals from two atoms overlap.
Delocalized Electron: assumes that each pair of electrons in a molecule occupies an orbital that encompass the entire
molecule. Every molecule has a set of these molecular orbitals, which are filled in the same way that atomic orbitals are filled in a
single atom.

Localized Electron Model of Covalent Bonding
The valence-bond model is essentially the Lewis stru cture model that you have probably encountered in y our introductory
chemistry class, but expanded to include some of the ideas of quantum mechanics. This model is the easier of the two to apply, so
we will focus most of our attention on it.The valence -bond model, sometimes referred to as the "localize d electron model" of
covalent bonding, is based on the following general postul ates.
1) A covalent bond is the sharing of a pair of electrons between two atoms.
We typically represent this by a Lewis structure, whi ch shows the valence electrons as dots. You should be somewhat
familiar with Lewis structures from prior coursework. Deta iled instructions for drawing Lewis structures are cove red
in a separate section.
2) The bond forms when two atomic orbitals overlap.
For example, the bond in H is formed when the 1s orbitals of the two atoms overlap. 2

6.1.1.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170028
3) Each pair of electrons that is not involved in bonding is localized on one atom.
In the Lewis structure of Cl above, six of the seven p airs of electrons are non-bonding. Each pair is loc alized on one
atom: three pairs on the left-hand Cl and three on the rig ht-hand Cl.
4) The shape of a molecule is determined by the repulsion of electrons in the valence shells of the atoms.
For example, in BeF, the atoms line up because the tw o bonding electron pairs repel each other and stay on opposite
sides of the Be atom.

Delocalized Electron Model of Covalent Bonding
The delocalized electron model model is much closer to reality than the localized electron model model. It accounts for delocalized
electrons, which Lewis structures don’t deal with well, and it allows us to explain some observations that Lewis structures cannot
account for, such as energetic and magnetic behavior of molecules. The delocalized electron model is enc ompassed in Molecular
Orbital Theory. This theory is based on the following assum ptions:
Every molecule has a set of orbitals.
Each of these molecular orbitals encompasses the entire mol ecule.
The rules for filling these orbitals are the same as the y are for filling atomic orbitals: only 2 electrons per orb ital, the
lowest energy orbitals fill first, and electrons spread t hemselves out when they are in equal-energy orbitals.
We can find the approximate shapes of molecular orbit als by adding wave functions for atomic orbitals.
Although more accurate, this model requires a more so phisticated mathematical treatment. We will introduce the core ideas by
considering diatomic molecules.
6.1.1: Covalent Bonding Fundamentals is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.2

6.1.2.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1700296.1.2: Interpreting Lewis Structures
To identify bonding and nonbonding electron pairs within a Lewis Structure.
To identify bond order for bonds within a Lewis Structure.
Understand the relationship between bond order, bond dist ance, and bond energy.
To use electronegativities to determine bond polarity.
To assign formal charges to each atom in a Lewis Structure.
This text assumes previous knowledge of Lewis Dot Structure s. The following section will review how to draw structu res, but first
we will address some key Lewis Dot Structure ideas.
Interpreting Lewis Structures
A Lewis structure contains symbols for the elements in a molecule, connected by lines and surrounded by pair s of dots. For
example, here is the Lewis structure for water, H O.
Each symbol represents the nucleus and the core electr ons of the atom. Here, each “H” represents the nucleus of a hydrogen atom,
and “O” represent the nucleus and the two core electr ons of the oxygen atom. The dots represent nonbonding valence
electrons. There are four nonbonding valence electron s on the oxygen atom. Each line represents a pair of b onding electrons, which
is shared between two atoms. This is typically called a single bond.
When there are two lines connecting a pair of atoms, there are four bonding electrons (two pairs) between the atoms. This is called
a double bond.
Three lines between a pair of atoms means six bonding elec trons (three pairs), and is called a triple bond.
Bond Order, Bond Distance, and Bond Energy
The number of electron pairs in a bond is called the bond order.
C–C single bond bond order = 1
C=C double bond bond o rder = 2
C C triple bond bond order = 3
The bond order is directly related to the length and str ength of a bond.
Higher bond order = stronger bond (higher bond energy)Learning Objectives

6.1.2.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170029 Higher bond order = shorter bond (smaller bond distance)
Here is an example, comparing the lengths and strengths of bonds between carbon and nitrogen.
Warning: this only works when you compare bonds between the same pair of elements. You can safely say that a C=N d ouble bond
is shorter than a C–N single bond, but you cannot saf ely say that a C=N double bond is shorter than a C–H si ngle bond. (In fact,
the C–H bond is shorter!)
The bond energy and bond distance depend on the bon d order, but they normally do not depend very much on the other atoms and
bonds in the molecule. For example, the circled N–H bonds in the following molecules are roughly the same length.
Bond Polarity
Whenever a covalent bond links atoms of different e lements, the bond will be polar. A polar bond is one in which the atoms have
unequal electrical charges. Generally, one atom will be negatively charged and the other will be positively charged. For example,
the bond in HCl is polar. The hydrogen atom is positi vely charged and the chlorine is negatively charged. We can represent this as
follows:
The symbol means “a little bit.” We use it to show th at the atoms are not ions with integer charges (+1 an d –1); the hydrogen
atom is slightly positive and the chlorine atom is slightly negative.
A bond is polar when the two atoms have different attr actions for electrons. In the case of HCl, chlorine at tracts electrons more
strongly than hydrogen does. Therefore, the two bon ding electrons move toward the chlorine atom, making it negatively charged
(and the hydrogen positively charged).

6.1.2.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170029

Electronegativity: determining which atom is positive and which is negative.
To figure out which atom is positively charged and wh ich is negatively charged in a covalent bond, we use the electronegativities
of the atoms. Electronegativity is a number that meas ures how strongly an atom attracts electrons, both it s own electrons and those
of other atoms. Here is a table that shows the electronegativi ties for the representative elements.
The elements with the lowest electronegativities are on the far left side of the table. These are element s that have weak attractions
for electrons; they do not attract electrons from o ther atoms, and they do not hold their own valence ele ctron(s) very tightly. These
atoms tend to be positively charged when they form c ompounds. The elements with the highest electronegativ ites are in the upper
right corner of the table. These are elements that have strong attractions for electrons; they can “st eal” electrons from other atoms,
and they hold their own valence electrons very tight ly. These atoms tend to be negatively charged when the y form compounds.
Note that hydrogen has an intermediate electronegati vity; it is quite different from the other group 1A elements (which is why
many tables also show it in group 7A).
Predicting which atom is positive and which is negative in a covalent bond is easy if we know the electronegati vities: When two
atoms form a covalent bond, the atom with the lower electronegativity becomes positively charged and the atom with the higher
electronegativity becomes negatively charged. (Helpful mnemonic: “The atom with a higher elec tronegativity becomes
negative.”) For example, we can use this guideline to predict the polarity of IBr. The electronegativity of I is 2.5 a nd that of Br is
2.8. Since 2.8 is higher than 2.5, the iodine atom is positiv ely charged and the bromine atom is negatively charged i n this molecule.

6.1.2.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170029Formal charges
In general, compounds that are built entirely from no nmetals are not ionic. The atoms are held together by covalent bonds. For
example, HCl is H–Cl, not H Cl. The atoms may have wea k electrical charges, because the bonds that link the m are polar, but
there are no ions present.
However, for some purposes, it is useful to carry out a sort of "electron book-keeping" and assign “make-be lieve” charges to the
atoms in a covalently-bonded compound. For example, a ssigning charges to atoms can help us to predict which of two possible
arrangements of atoms is more stable. For example, we can predict that the arrangement H–C–N is more stable t han the
arrangement H–N–C for the compound HCN. In addition, th ese charges help us to understand and balance oxidat ion-reduction
reactions, in which one or more atoms change charges. (You wi ll learn about these reactions in Chem 101B.)
The charges that we assign to atoms in a covalently-bond ed molecule are called formal charges. Every atom in a molecule or
polyatomic ion has a formal charge (which could be z ero). For example, here are the formal charges in O (a molecule) and ClO
(a polyatomic ion):
We will look at how to assign formal charges in a mome nt, but first, note that the formal charges must add up to the overall
charge on the molecule or ion.
For O, -1 + 1 + 0 = 0 (which matches the overall charge on O)
For ClO, -1 + 2 + -1 + -1 = -1 (which matches the overall charge on ClO)

Assigning Formal Charges
To assign formal charges to each of the atoms in any molecule or polyatomic ion, you must compare number valence electrons that
each atom contributes or "brings" to the molecule to the number of electrons that the atom "owns" in the molecule.
(1) The number of electrons which an atom "brings" to the molecule is determined by its position on the p eriodic table. The number
of electrons it "brings" is equatl to the valence electrons o n the neutral atom.
(2) The number of electrons which an atom "owns" in determ ined based on the following:
* Non-bonding electrons "belong" to the atom on which th ey are located.
* Bonding electrons must be "split" between the two bond a toms involved in the bond (they are sharing after all...)
The formal charge for an atom is:
(number of electrons the atom brings to the molecule) – (number of electrons the atom actually owns in the molecule)

Here are two illustrations:
1) Formal charges on O (ozone):
For each atom in the molecule, we must determine how m any electrons it "brings" to the molecule and how many electrons it
"owns" in the molecule. Oxygen is in group 6A, so each o f the oxygen atoms will bring six valence electrons t o the molecule. To+ –
3 3–
3 3
32–3–

6.1.2.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170029determine the number of electrons each atom "owns" yo u follow the guidelines above, adding the non-bondin g electrons and half
of the bonding electrons. The red lines show where we mus t "split" the bonding electrons:
Left oxygen atom Center oxygen atom Right oxygen atom
number of electrons the atom
brings to the molecule6 6 6
number of electrons the atom
actually owns in the molecule7
(six non-bonding, one bonding)5
(two non-bonding, three
bonding)6
(four non-bonding, two
bonding)
formal charge = " brings" –
"owns"-1 +1 0

Formal charges are usually written next to the atoms in the original Lewis structure. We often omit the zero es and just write the
nonzero formal charges.
2) Formal charges on ClO (chlorate ion):
For each atom in the molecule, we must determine how m any electrons it "brings" to the molecule and how many electrons it
"owns" in the molecule. Oxygen is in group 6A, so each of the oxygen atoms will bring six valence electrons t o the molecule.
Chlorine is in group 7A and bring seven valence ele ctrons to the molecule. To determine the number of electrons each atom "owns"
you follow the guidelines above, adding the non-bondin g electrons and half of the bonding electrons. The re d lines show where we
must "split" the bonding electrons:
Formal charge analysis of the atoms in ClO- ion3–

6.1.2.6 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170029 Chlorine atom Left oxygen atom Top oxygen atom Right oxygen atom
number of electrons the
atom brings to the
molecule7 6 6 6
number of electrons the
atom actually owns in
the molecule5
(two non-bonding, three
bonding)7
(six non-bonding, one
bonding)7
(six non-bonding, one
bonding)7
(six non-bonding, one
bonding)
formal charge =
"brings" – "owns"+2 -1 -1 -1

Lewis structure of IBr showing partial positive cha rge on I and patial negative charge on Br
Note the difference between formal charges and partia l charges based on bond polarity. Formal charges are artificial charges that
we calculate by breaking Lewis structures apart in a sort of electron book-keeping. We can calculate the m, but they are not the true
charges on the atoms. Bond polarities give us a rou gh idea of the true charges on atoms in a molecule, but we cannot c alculate
numbers. For example, the formal charges on both atoms in HCl are zero, but we know that the true charges are not zero, because
the electronegativities are different.

Formal charges will prove useful tools in future section s, but for now, just focus on how to correctly calculate them.
6.1.2: Interpreting Lewis Structures is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

6.1.3.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1700326.1.3: Drawing Lewis Structures
To draw Lewis Structures for molecules and polyatomic ion s with one central atom.

Introduction to Lewis structures
A Lewis structure is a way to show how atoms share electro ns when they form a molecule. Lewis structures show all of the valence
electrons in an atom or molecule. The valence electrons are the electrons in the outer most shell. For representative elements, the
number of valence electrons equals the group number o n the periodic table. To draw the Lewis structure of an atom, write the
symbol of the atom and draw dots around it to represent the valence electrons.
Note that hydrogen is often shown in both group 1A an d group 7A, but it has one valence electron – never s even. Also, helium is
shown in group 8A, but it only has two valence electrons.

Representing a Covalent Bond Using Lewis Structures
Nonmetals can form a chemical bond by sharing two ele ctrons. Each atom contributes one electron to the bond. For example, two
hydrogen atoms can form a bond, producing a molecule of H. Using Lewis structures, we can represent this as follows:
Two fluorine atoms can form a molecule of F in the same f ashion. Note that each atom must contribute one electro n to the bond.
Atoms can form more than one bond. In a water molecule, an oxyg en atom forms two bonds, one to each hydrogen atom.
Chemists normally represent a bond using a line instead of two dots. The structures of H, F, and H O would usually be drawn
as follows:
Only the bonding electrons are shown using lines. Nonbondi ng electrons are always shown using dots.Learning Objectives
2 2 2

6.1.3.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170032
Multiple Bonds
The bonds on the previous section are called single bonds. Each bond contains two electrons (one bonding pair). A pair of atoms
can also share four electrons or six electrons. If t he atoms share four electrons, the bond is called a double bond. For example, the
bond in O is a double bond.
A double bond is normally depicted with two parallel line s.
If the atoms share six electrons, the bond is called a triple bond. Triple bonds are rather rare, but the bond in N is a triple bond.
A triple bond is depicted with three parallel lines.

Drawing Lewis structures for molecules with one central atom: two rules
In Chem 101A, we will focus on drawing Lewis structures of mo lecules and polyatomic ions that have one central at om with
several other atoms attached to it. Such molecules a re very common, and they provide a foundation for u nderstanding structures of
more complex molecules. To begin, you must know two essenti al rules for drawing Lewis structures.
Rule 1: In any molecule or ion with the general formula AB, the unique atom (A) is in the center and all of the B
atoms are attached to A.
For example, the basic arrangements of the atoms in SO, NH, and PCl are:
Do not ever draw a structure like the ones below!2
n
3 4+5

6.1.3.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170032

Rule 2: Lewis structures are not intended to show the actual shape of the molecule; they only show which atoms are
bonded to each other.
None of the molecules above actually look like the struct ures here. For example, the actual shape of SO is:

Drawing Lewis structures for molecules with one central atom: steps to success
The following procedure will give you the correct Lewis st ructure for any molecule or polyatomic ion that has one central atom.
Step 1: Figure out how many electrons the molecule must have, based on the number of valence electrons in each a tom. When
drawing the structure of an ion, be sure to add/subtract e lectrons to account for the charge.
Step 2: Connect the atoms to each other with single bonds to form a “skeleton structure.”
Step 3: Starting with the outer atoms first, add the remaini ng valence electrons, giving each atom an octet. (Exception: do not add
electrons to hydrogen atoms.)
If there are too few electrons to give all atoms the necessary octets, then make double or triple bonds. (Avoid double bonds to
halogens, if possible.)
If there are “extra” electrons remaining after all atoms have octets, then add them as lone pairs to the central bonding atom.
Note: if a central atom must accommodate more than 8 elec trons around it, we say that this central atom has an “expan ded
octet”. Expanded octets are fairly common with elements in the 3rd row and below, and it is okay to violate the oct et rule, if
necessary, for these larger atoms.
Step 4: Check that your structure is valid. A valid structure must have the correct number of valence electrons a nd obey the octet
rule where necessary. Note: there may be more than one valid Lewis Structure.
Are the correct number of valence electrons shown? The electron count in your final structure must match t he count from
step 1.
Do all atoms have an octet? (If not, are they one of the exceptions to the rule? See b elow.)

WARNING: exceptions to the octet rule!
The octet rule dictates much of the bonding pattern s in chemical structure. However, there are many except ions. You will need to
know when it is okay to break the octet rule.
1. Hydrogen must have a “duet” (two electrons). Do not give hy drogen an octet.
2. Boron often has a “sextet” (six electrons). If necessar y, boron can have an octet.
3. Elements in the 3rd row and below can accommodate more t han an octet, if necessary.

Example: drawing the Lewis structure of CO
Step 1) Total the valence electrons.3
32–

6.1.3.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170032
Carbon has 4 valence electrons
Each oxygen has 6 valence electrons
The -2 charge means that there are 2 extra el ectrons
Total: 4 + (3 × 6) + 2 = 24 electrons
The final answer MUST have this number of electrons‼!
Step 2) Draw the "skeleton structure".

Step 3) Add remaining valence electrons, starting with the outer atoms first, giving all atoms an octet (except H).
The outer atoms are the oxygen atoms here. Each outer atom n eeds three electron pairs, since it already has one bondi ng pair.
(1 line = 2 electrons)

In the above structure, the outer atoms now all have an octet, but note that the central atom does not!! Unfortunately, we have run
out of electrons (we only had 24!!). Since we do not have any additional electrons available, we will create an extra bond by
changing one of the nonbonding pairs into a bonding pair.
Notice that this step does not change the total number of electrons in our structure. It just moves 2 electrons to a di fferent location.
Step 4) Check if the structure is valid.
a) Are the correct number of valence electrons shown? T he electron count in your final structure must match th e count from step 1.
This structure has 24 electrons.
3 lines = 6 bonding electrons
18 dots = 18 nonbonding electrons
total = 24 electrons
Does this match the count you got in step 1?
CO: should have 24 electrons (from step 1) and our structure has 24 electrons – check! It MATCHES!
b) Do all atoms have an octet? (If not, are they one of the exceptions to the rule?)32–

6.1.3.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170032Yes, all atoms in this structure have an octet.
Chemists often draw square brackets around the structure of a polyatomic ion and write the charge outside the brack ets, like this:
Note: we could have put the double bond in two other l ocations. Any of the three options is fine; you only n eed to draw one of
them.
(If you’re wondering “what about resonance??”… we’ll get to t hat later on.)

Example: Drawing Lewis structures for BF, PF and BrF
Next, we’ll look at three molecules side-by-side. The mo lecules are BF, PF, and BrF, all of which have a centr al atom bonded to
three fluorine atoms.
Step 1) Figure out how many electrons each molecule must have.
BF: 3 + 7 + 7 + 7 = 24 electrons
PF: 5 + 7 + 7 + 7 = 26 electrons
BrF: 7 + 7 + 7 + 7 = 28 electrons
The final answers MUST have these numbers of electrons‼!
Step 2) Draw a "skeleton structure”.3 3 3
3 3 3

6.1.3.6 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170032Step 3) Add the remaining electrons, starting with the outer atoms, to complete their octets.
Each outer atom needs three electron pairs.

The outer atoms now have octets. Let's pause here...
BF: Our structure has 24 electrons, so we've added all the valence electrons (from step 1)
PF: Our structure has 24 electrons, but we kno w it should have 26 electrons (from step 1), so WE STILL NEED TO ADD 2
MORE ELECTRONS
BrF: Our structure has 24 electrons, but we know it should have 28 electrons (from step 1), so WE STILL NEED TO ADD 4
MORE ELECTRONS
These "extra" electrons should be added to the central at om, as pairs:
Step 4) Check if the structure is valid.
BF: a) Our structure has 24 electrons (6 bonding electrons a nd 18 nonbonding electrons), matching the count in step 1!
b) The fluorine atoms all have an octet. Check! The bo ron atom does not have an octet, but boron is one of the
exceptions and is fine with a sextet. So, check!
PF: a) Our structure has 26 electrons (6 bonding electrons an d 20 nonbonding electrons), matching the count in step 1!
b) All atoms have an octet. Check!
BrF: a) Our structure has 28 electrons (6 bonding electrons a nd 22 nonbonding electrons), matching the count in step 1!
b) The fluorine atoms all have an octet. Check! The br omine has more than an octet, but bromine is in period 4 and
can accommodate an expanded octet. So, check!

Breaking the Octet Rule is common
The central atom in a structure often violates the octet r ule. Electron-deficient atoms are rare, but expanded octets are
fairly common with elements in the 3 row and beyond.
In BF, the central atom only has 6 electrons around it. We sa y that the boron atom is electron deficient.
rd

6.1.3.7 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170032In BrF, the central atom has 10 electrons around it. We sa y that the bromine atom has an expanded octet.
Note that it is also quite common for the central atom to make more than four bonds. Here are a couple of examples:
Don’t panic if you see such molecules. Just follow the rules for drawing Lewis structures, and you’ll get the m right! However, you
must note that outer atoms never violate the octet rule.

Using formal charges to determine how many bonds to make, a different perspective...
If we draw the Lewis structure for PO ion using the rules you’ve seen earlier, we come up with the structure bel ow. It has the
correct number of electrons (32), and every atom satisfi es the octet rule.

However, many textbooks (and websites) insist that the structure below is a better one, even though the phos phorus atom has ten
electrons around it:

The first structure follows the rules for drawing structu res. So why do chemists add a double bond? To understan d, we need the
formal charges on the atoms in each structure…3
43–

6.1.3.8 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170032
Many chemists prefer the second structure because it gives us a couple of zeroes. However, the phosphorus ato m in the second
structure violates the octet rule. So which structure is best?? The answer is that either structure is legitimate. Both structures give
us all of the information we need about phosphate ion; they allow us to predict the shape of the molecule, the angles between the
bonds, and whether the molecule is polar.
So which structure should YOU draw on a test? Be sure to check with your instructor, but most will accept eith er one. However, the
first structure is easier to figure out, because it’s the structure you produce when you follo w the provided rules. The second
structure requires more work. Therefore, we recommend t hat when you draw a structure that satisfies the octet rule, you stop there
without adding more bonds.
WARNING: Some students come to Chem 101A having been taught to draw Lewis st ructures with extra double bonds.
If you’re familiar with Lewis structures and you like the extr a bonds… congratulations! You have less to learn – you alr eady know
all of this stuff.
BUT …
If you draw structures with extra bonds, they have to be correct. For example, a structure for phosphate tha t has two double bonds
is not acceptable.
Also, a structure for nitrate ion (NO) that has two do uble bonds is not acceptable, even though it gives y ou more zeroes. The
structure with one double bond is the only acceptable one.
If you don’t know why the structures I’ve labeled “un acceptable” are not allowed, don’t risk losing point s by adding extra bonds
when the central atom already has eight electrons.
Using formal charges to evaluate which is the best central atom...
Generally, you are told which atom is the central bondin g atom in the molecule. However, if it is unclear, or i f you are asked to
decide which atom is central, formal charges can be used to decide. The following is an example.
Example: calculating the formal charges in HCN and HNC
For the arrangement HCN, the Lewis structure: H–C N:
The formal charges work out as follows: 3–

6.1.3.9 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170032
For the arrangement HNC, the Lewis structure: H–N C:
The formal charges work out as follows:
Both Lewis structures have a net formal charge of zero, but note that the formal ch arges on the first structure are all zero! Thus the
first Lewis structure is predicted to be more stable, and it is, in fact, the structure observed experiment ally. In general, the closer the
formal charges are to zero, the more stable the struc ture. Remember, though, that formal charges do not represent the actual charges
on atoms in a molecule or ion. They are used simply as a book-keeping method for predicting the most stable Lewis structure for a
compound.
Summary

References

Contributors and Attributions
James Armstrong, City College of San Francisco
Torrey Glenn, City College of San Francisco

6.1.3: Drawing Lewis Structures is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

6.1.4.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1700306.1.4: Resonance Lewis Structures
Use resonance structures to show electron delocalization.
Use formal charges to determine major and minor resonance co ntributors.
Sometimes one Lewis Structure is not Enough
Some molecules or ions cannot be adequately described by a single Lewis structure. For example, drawing one Le wis structure for
ozone (O) gives us a misleading picture of the actua l bonding in the molecule. If we draw a Lewis structur e for O (ozone), we get
this:
This structure predicts that the two bonds are differe nt lengths and strengths, because double bonds are shorter and stronger than
single bonds. However, this prediction in incorrect; the two bonds in O are actually identical in length and strength.
Resonance is a way of describing delocalized electro ns within certain molecules or polyatomic ions where th e bonding cannot be
expressed by a single Lewis formula. A molecule or io n with such delocalized electrons is represented by se veral contributing
structures (also called resonance structures or resona nce contributors). The basic concept of resonance theory i s the following:
Whenever you can draw two or more equivalent Lewis structures for a molecule, the actual molecule behaves like the
average of the possible structures.

Applying resonance theory to O
Let’s apply resonance theory to O. For this molecule, we can draw two equivalent structures, as shown below:
Using resonance theory, we predict that the true struct ure of ozone is the average of these two structures. But how do you take the
average of two chemical structures?? When we take the average of two structures, we are reall y taking the average of two things:
the bond orders and the formal charges.
Let’s begin with bond orders. We start by looking at t he order of the left-hand bond in each structure. (Remember that the bond
order is the number of electron pairs between two atoms. For a single bond, the bond order is 1; for a doubl e bond, it’ s 2; and for
a triple bond, it’ s 3.)
One structure tells us that this is a double bond, wh ile the other tells us that it’s a single bond. The actual order of the left-hand
bond should be the average of these two numbers, which is 1.5. Next, we focus on the right-hand bond. Again, one struct ure
tells us that it is a double bond, while the other tells u s that it’s a single bond.
The actual order of the right-hand bond should be th e average of these two numbers, which is also 1.5. Based on resonance theory,
the molecule should have two equal bonds, each of whi ch has an order of 1.5. We can depict this using li nes to represent partialLearning Objectives
3 3

6.1.4.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170030bonds:
When we want to show that we must use resonance theory to understand the behavior of a molecule, we draw all o f the legitimate
structures and use double-sided arrows to mean “take th e average of these.”
We can also use resonance theory to refine our under standing of formal charges. The formal charges in eac h structure are shown
below.
In resonance theory, we take the average of the form al charges on each atom. For the central atom, the fo rmal charge is +1 in both
structures, and the average of +1 and +1 is +1. For t he left-hand atom, we are finding the average of 0 an d –1, which is –½. For the
right-hand atom, we are finding the average of –1 and 0, which is also –½. Therefore, resonance theory gives us the following
charges:
In ozone, then, the central atom is positively charg ed, and the outer atoms are negatively charged (and h ave equal charges). The
overall picture of ozone that we end up with is…

Or if we have used the Valence Shell Electron Pair Repulsion Theory (VSEPR) to determine the three-dimensional shape:

Applying resonance theory to CO
The carbonate ion is an example of a molecule for wh ich we can draw three equivalent structures. Each str ucture has one double
bond and two single bonds, suggesting that one of the bonds is shorter than the other two. However, since th e structures are
equivalent, we must take the average of the three to get an accurate picture of carbonate.
Once again, we have to consider one bond at a time. Let’s start with the vertical bond:32–

6.1.4.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170030
The true order of this bond is the average of these three numbers:
(1 + 2 + 1) ÷ 3 = /
Next, let’s do the right-hand bond:
The true order of this bond is the average of these three numbers:
(1 + 1 + 2) ÷ 3 = / (the same as the vertical bond)
Finally, we do the left-hand bond:
The true order of this bond is the average of these three numbers:
(2 + 1 + 1) ÷ 3 = / (the same as the other two bonds)
Using the resonance theory, we predict that the three bonds in the carbonate ion should be identical, with a bond order of /. In
fact, this is correct: the three bonds in the carbon ate ion really are the same length. Also, these three bonds are shorter than a
typical C–O single bond, and they are longer than a typi cal C=O double bond.
For the formal charges, we first work out the formal charg e on each atom in each structure.
Then we look at each atom. The central carbon atom h as a charge of zero in all structures, so its charge is zero when we take the
average. For the left-hand oxygen, the charge is zero in the first structure and –1 in the other two; the average is (0 + -1 + -1) ÷ 3 =
- /. The other two oxygen atoms give the same result, so al l three oxygen atoms have a charge of - /. The overall b onding picture
that results is:
The three dimensional shape is that predicted by Valenc e Shell Electron Repulsion Theory.43

6.1.4.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170030Benzene is a common organic solvent that was previou sly used in gasoline; it is no longer used for this purpose, however,
because it is now known to be a carcinogen. The benzene molecule () consists of a regular hexagon of carbo n atoms, each
of which is also bonded to a hydrogen atom. Use resonance s tructures to describe the bonding in benzene.
Given: molecular formula and molecular geometry
Asked for: resonance structures
Strategy:
A. Draw a structure for benzene illustrating the bonded ato ms. Then calculate the number of valence electrons used i n this
drawing.
B. Subtract this number from the total number of valence e lectrons in benzene and then locate the remaining elec trons such
that each atom in the structure reaches an octet.
C. Draw the resonance structures for benzene.
Solution:
A Each hydrogen atom contributes 1 valence electron, and each carbon atom contributes 4 valence electrons, for a total of (6 ×
1) + (6 × 4) = 30 valence electrons. If we place a si ngle bonding electron pair between each pair of carb on atoms and between
each carbon and a hydrogen atom, we obtain the following:
Each carbon atom in this structure has only 6 electr ons and has a formal charge of +1, but we have used on ly 24 of the 30
valence electrons.
B If the 6 remaining electrons are uniformly distributed pa irwise on alternate carbon atoms, we obtain the following:
Three carbon atoms now have an octet configuration an d a formal charge of −1, while three carbon atoms ha ve only 6 electrons
and a formal charge of +1. We can convert each lone pair to a bonding electron pair, which gives each at om an octet of
electrons and a formal charge of 0, by making three C=C doub le bonds.
C There are, however, two ways to do this:
Each structure has alternating double and single bon ds, but experimentation shows that each carbon–carbon bo nd in benzene is
identical, with bond lengths (139.9 pm) intermediate b etween those typically found for a C–C single bond (15 4 pm) and a C=C
double bond (134 pm). We can describe the bonding in benzene using the two resonance structures, but the a ctual electronic
structure is an average of the two. The existence of multiple resonance structures for aromatic hydrocarb ons like benzene is
often indicated by drawing either a circle or dashed lin es inside the hexagon:Example: Benzene

6.1.4.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170030
The sodium salt of nitrite is used to relieve muscle spasms. Draw two resonance structures for the nitrite ion (NO).
Answer
Resonance structures are particularly common in oxoa nions of the p-block elements, such as sulfate and phosphate, and in
aromatic hydrocarbons, such as benzene and naphthalene.

What resonance is NOT…
There are three common misunderstandings about resonance theory. Be careful not to fall into these traps!
1) Resonance does not mean that the molecule goes back and forth between the structures.
Ozone does not go back and forth between the two structures we can draw. It never has one short bond and one long bond.
Ozone never looks like this: O=O—O
Ozone never looks like this either: O—O=O
Instead, it always looks like this:

2) In resonance, you can only move electrons. Never move atoms.
For example, the following two structures are not legitimate resonance structures, because we have mo ved the hydrogen atom. The
true structure of HCO is not the average of these two structures.
However, the two structures below are legitimate resonance structures, and we would need to average them to find the true
structure of bicarbonate ion.
3) Resonance structures cannot disobey the octet rule.Exercise: Nitrate Ion
2−
3–

6.1.4.6 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170030In the example below (the chloroformate ion, ClCO), the first two structures are legitimate, but the third and fourth structures
violate the octet rule (the central atom has only six elec trons in structure #3, and it has ten electrons in structur e #4).
The structure below is also incorrect, but for a diffe rent reason. It obeys the octet rule, but HCO must have a total of 18
electrons, and the structure below has 20. This would be the struc ture of HCO.
In general, all legitimate resonance structures for a gi ven molecule will have the same number of double bonds.
Finally, the structure below is also incorrect, but f or yet another reason: chlorine is in group 7A, and t he group 7A elements cannot
form double bonds.
What if resonance structures are not equivalent?
Sometimes, it’s possible to draw two legitimate Lewis stru ctures for the same arrangement of atoms without the st ructures being
equivalent. For example, consider the following two structure s for nitrous acid, HNO.
Both of these structures obey the rules for drawing Lewis structures; they have the correct number of elec trons, and all atoms (other
than H) obey the octet rule. In addition, we have not moved any atoms around; both structures have the ar rangement H–O–N–O.
However, the structures are not equivalent. In the first structure, the two oxygen atoms have the bonding patterns –O– and =O.
In the second structure, the two oxygen atoms have th e bonding patterns –O= and –O. When two resonance structures are not
equivalent, the real molecule will most closely resemble the structure that has more atoms with zero formal charge. Working out
formal charges for the atoms in these structures, we get:
In the left-hand structure, all formal charges are ze ro, but the right-hand structure has two non-zero form al charges. Therefore, the
true structure of HNO looks more like the structure on the left. To envision this, we can start by drawing the avera ge of the
two structures. Then, the true structure will be somewhere b etween the average and the left-hand structure.
The average of the two structures would look like this (co nsidering the bond orders only):
2–
2–
23–

6.1.4.7 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170030The left-hand structure from the previous page looked li ke this:
The real structure of HNO lies somewhere between these two.
The actual bond distances in this molecule are 146 pm for the left-hand N–O bond and 120 pm for the righ t-hand N–O bond,
agreeing with our picture.
Instead of drawing a structure with dashed lines to re present partial bonds, chemists normally draw the reso nance structures and
label them as a “major contributor” or a “minor cont ributor.” The major contributor is the structure th at has the most zeroes; the
actual molecule will look most like the major contributo r.
We also encounter situations where the formal charges are the same in both structures, but the atoms that hold the non-zero formal
charges are different. The C H O ion is an example. He re are the two possible resonance structures for thi s ion, with the non-zero
formal charges included.
Both structures have five atoms with zero formal cha rge and one atom with a formal charge of –1. In such cases, the true
structure resembles the structure that has the negative charge on the atom with the higher electronegativity (or the positive
charge on the atom with the lower electronegativity). Oxygen has a higher electronegativity than carbon (3.5 versus 2.5), so the
left-hand structure is the major contributor. We can r epresent this as follows:
Here is a sketch that might help you envision what th e real molecule would look like. The negative charge s are included; the larger
minus sign means that there is a larger negative charge o n the oxygen atom.
2 3–

6.1.4.8 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170030The thiocyanate ion (SCN), which is used in printing and as a corrosion inhibitor against acidic gases, h as at least two
possible Lewis electron structures. Draw two possible struc tures, assign formal charges on all atoms in both, and d ecide which
is the preferred arrangement of electrons.
Given: chemical species
Asked for: Lewis electron structures, formal charges, and preferred arrangement
Strategy:
A. Use the step-by-step procedure to write two plausible Lewis e lectron structures for SCN.
B. Calculate the formal charge on each atom using Equat ion.
C. Predict which structure is the major contributor base d on the formal charge on each atom and its electronegat ivity relative
to the other atoms present.
Solution:
A Possible Lewis structures for the SCN ion are as follows:
B We must calculate the formal charges on each atom t o identify the more stable structure. If we begin with carbon, we notice
that the carbon atom in each of these structures sh ares four bonding pairs, the number of bonds typical for carbon, so it has a
formal charge of zero. Continuing with sulfur, we observ e that in (a) the sulfur atom shares one bonding pai r and has three lone
pairs and has a total of six valence electrons. The formal charge on the sulfur atom is therefore
In (c), nitrogen has a formal charge of −2.
C Which structure is preferred? Structure (b) is pref erred because the negative charge is on the more ele ctronegative atom (N),
and it has lower formal charges on each atom as compared to structure (c): 0, −1 versus +1, −2.
Salts containing the fulminate ion (CNO) are used in e xplosive detonators. Draw three Lewis electron structur es for CNO
and use formal charges to predict which is more stable. (Not e: N is the central atom.)
Answer
The second structure is predicted to be more stable.
Summary
Resonance occurs when we can draw two or more legitimate Lewi s structures for the same molecule.
Resonance only occurs when a molecule has at least one dou ble bond. Molecules with only single bonds never show resonance.
Resonance structures must all have the correct number of el ectrons and must all obey the octet rule.
All resonance structures must have the atoms in the same p ositions. (“Don’t move the letters – just move dots and l ines.”)
All resonance structures for a given molecule have the s ame number of double bonds.Example: The Thiocyanate Ion
Exercise: The Fulminate Ion

6.1.4.9 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170030If all resonance structures are equivalent, the true molec ule is the average of the resonance structures.
If the resonance structures are not equivalent, the true m olecule looks more like…
· …the structure with the most zeroes (formal charges), or…
· …the molecule with the negative charge on the atom with the highest electronegativity and/or the positive charge on the atom
with the lowest electronegativity.

Contributors and Attributions
James Armstrong, City College of San Francisco
Torrey Glenn, City College of San Francisco
6.1.4: Resonance Lewis Structures is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

6.1.5.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1700356.1.5: Strength of Covalent Bonds
The define Bond-dissociation energy (bond energy)
To correlate bond strength with bond length
To define and used average bond energies
In proposing his theory that octets can be complete d by two atoms sharing electron pairs, Lewis provided sc ientists with the first
description of covalent bonding. In this section, we expand on this and describe some of the properties of covalent bonds. The
stability of a molecule is a function of the strength of th e covalent bonds holding the atoms together.
Bond Dissociation Energy
Bond dissociation energy (also referred to as bond e nergy) is the enthalpy change (, heat input) require d to break a bond (in 1
mole of a gaseous substance)
What about when we have a compound which is not a diatomic m olecule? Consider the dissociation of methane:
There are four equivalent C-H bonds, thus we can that the di ssociation energy for a single C-H bond would be:
The bond energy for a given bond is influenced by t he rest of the molecule. However, this is a relatively small effect
(suggesting that bonding electrons are localized be tween the bonding atoms). Thus, the bond energy for mo st bonds varies little
from the average bonding energy for that type of bo nd. Table lists the average values for some commonly encountered
bonds. Note that bond energy is always a positive value - it takes energy to break a covalent bond (co nversely energy is
released during bond formation.)
Table: Average Bond Energies (kJ/mol) for Commonly E ncountered Bonds at 273 KLearning Objectives

6.1.5.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170035Single Bonds Multiple Bonds
H–H 432 C–C 346 N–N ≈167 O–O ≈142 F–F 155 C=C 614
H–C 411 C–Si 318 N–O 201 O–F 190 F–Cl 249 C≡C 839
H–Si 318 C–N 305 N–F 283 O–Cl 218 F–Br 249 C=N 615
H–N 391 C–O 358 N–Cl 313 O–Br 201 F–I 278 C≡N 887
H–P ≈322 C–S 272 N–Br 243 O–I 201 Cl–Cl 240 O=O 495
H–O 459 C–F 485 P–P 201 S–S 226 Cl–Br 216 N=O 607
H–S 363 C–Cl 327 S–F 284 Cl–I 208 N=N 418
H–F 565 C–Br 285 S–Cl 255 Br–Br 190 N≡N 941
H–Cl 428 C–I 213 S–Br 218 Br–I 175 C≡N 891
H–Br 362 Si–Si 222 I–I 149 C≡O 1072
H–I 295 Si–O 452 C=O 745
C=O
(in CO)799
Source: Data from J. E. Huheey, E. A. Keiter, and R. L. Keiter, Inorganic Chemistry, 4th ed. (1993).
The Relationship between Bond Order and Bond Energy
Triple bonds between like atoms are shorter than doub le bonds, and because more energy is required to comp letely break all three
bonds than to completely break two, a triple bond is also stronger than a double bond. Similarly, double bo nds between like atoms
are stronger and shorter than single bonds. Bonds of t he same order between different atoms show a wide range of bond energies,
however. Table lists the average values for some commo nly encountered bonds. Although the values shown vary widely, we
can observe four trends:
1. Bonds between hydrogen and atoms in the same column of the periodic table decrease in strength as we go down the colu mn.
Thus an H–F bond is stronger than an H–I bond, H–C is stron ger than H–Si, H–N is stronger than H–P, H–O is stronger than H–
S, and so forth. The reason for this is that the region of spa ce in which electrons are shared between two atoms becomes
proportionally smaller as one of the atoms becomes lar ger (part (a) in Figure).
2. Bonds between like atoms usually become weaker as we go down a column (important exceptions are noted la ter). For
example, the C–C single bond is stronger than the Si–Si single bo nd, which is stronger than the Ge–Ge bond, and so forth. As
two bonded atoms become larger, the region between them occ upied by bonding electrons becomes proportionally smaller, as
illustrated in part (b) in Figure. Noteworthy exceptions ar e single bonds between the period 2 atoms of groups 15, 16,
and 17 (i.e., N, O, F), which are unusually weak compared with single bonds between their larger congeners. It is likel y that the
N–N, O–O, and F–F single bonds are weaker than might be expected d ue to strong repulsive interactions between lone pairs of
electrons on adjacent atoms. The trend in bond energies for the halogens is ther efore
Similar effects are also seen for the O–O versus S–S and for N–N versus P–P single bonds.
3. Because elements in periods 3 and 4 rarely form multiple bonds with themselves, their multiple bond energies are not accurately
known. Nonetheless, they are presumed to be significantly weak er than multiple bonds between lighter atoms of the same
families. Compounds containing an Si=Si double bond, for e xample, have only recently been prepared, whereas compou nds
containing C=C double bonds are one of the best-studied a nd most important classes of organic compounds.2

6.1.5.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170035
Figure: The Strength of Covalent Bonds Depends on the Overlap bet ween the Valence Orbitals of the Bonded Atoms. The
relative sizes of the region of space in which electro ns are shared between (a) a hydrogen atom and lighter (smal ler) vs. heavier
(larger) atoms in the same periodic group; and (b) two lighter versus two heavier atoms in the same group. Although the ab solute
amount of shared space increases in both cases on going f rom a light to a heavy atom, the amount of space relative to the size of
the bonded atom decreases; that is, the percentage of total orbital volume decreases with increasing size. Hence the strength of the
bond decreases.
4. Multiple bonds between carbon, oxygen, or nitrogen and a p eriod 3 element such as phosphorus or sulfur tend to be unusua lly
strong. In fact, multiple bonds of this type dominate the chemistry of the period 3 elements of groups 15 and 16. Multip le bonds
to phosphorus or sulfur occur as a result of d-orbital interactions, as we discussed for the SO ion. In contrast, silicon in group
14 has little tendency to form discrete silicon–oxygen double bonds. Consequently, SiO has a three-dimensiona l network
structure in which each silicon atom forms four Si–O single bonds, which makes the physical and chemical properties of SiO
very different from those of CO.
Bond strength increases as bond order increases.
Bond distance decreases, as bond order increases.
The Relationship between Molecular Structure and Bond Energy
Bond energy is defined as the energy required to bre ak a particular bond in a molecule in the gas phase. Its value depends on not
only the identity of the bonded atoms but also their environment. Thus the bond energy of a C–H single bo nd is not the same in all
organic compounds. For example, the energy required to break a C–H bond in methane varies by as much as 2 5% depending on
how many other bonds in the molecule have already bee n broken (Table); that is, the C–H bond energy depend s on its
molecular environment. Except for diatomic molecule s, the bond energies listed in Table are average values for all bonds of
a given type in a range of molecules. Even so, they are not likely to differ from the actual value of a gi ven bond by more than about
10%.
Table: Energies for the Dissociation of Successive C–H B onds in Methane. Source: Data from CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics
(2004).
Reaction D (kJ/mol)
CH (g) → CH (g) + H(g) 439
CH (g) → CH (g) + H(g) 462
CH (g) → CH(g) + H(g) 424
CH(g) → C(g) + H(g) 338
We can estimate the enthalpy change for a chemical reaction by adding together the average energies of the bonds broken in the
reactants and the average energies of the bonds form ed in the products and then calculating the differen ce between the two. If the
bonds formed in the products are stronger than thos e broken in the reactants, then energy will be released in the reaction (Δ H <
0):42−
4 3
3 2
rxn

6.1.5.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170035The ≈ sign is used because we are adding together average bond energies; hence this approach does not give e xact values for
ΔH.
Let’s consider the reaction of n-heptane (C H) with oxygen gas to give carbon dioxide and water. Note: n-heptane is a chain of
seven carbon atoms, with hydrogen atoms bonded to each carbo n:

This reaction of n-heptane is one reaction that occurs during the combustion of gasoline:
In this reaction, 6 C–C bonds, 16 C–H bonds, and 11 O=O bonds are broken per mole of n-heptane, while 14 C=O bonds (two for
each CO) and 16 O–H bonds (two for each H O) are formed. The ene rgy changes can be tabulated as follows:
Bonds Broken (kJ/mol) Bonds Formed (kJ/mol)
6 C–C 346 × 6 = 2076 14 C=O 799 × 14 = 11,186
16 C–H 411 × 16 = 6576 16 O–H 459 × 16 = 7344
11 O=O 495 × 11 = 5445 Total = 18,530
Total = 14,097
For the above example, the energy required to break the bonds in the reactant molecules (14,097 kJ/mol) was less than the energy
released upon formation of the bonds in the product s (18,530 kJ/mol)! The difference is about 4433 kJ/m ol, meaning that is
approximately −4433 kJ/mol. The reaction is highly exot hermic (which is not too surprising for a combustion reaction).
If we compare this approximation with the value obtai ned from measured values (), we find a
discrepancy of only about 8%, less than the 10% typi cally encountered. Chemists find this method useful for calculating
approximate enthalpies of reaction. These approximati ons can be important for predicting whether a reacti on is exothermic or
endothermic —and to what degree.
The compound RDX (Research Development Explosive) is a m ore powerful explosive than dynamite and is used by t he
military. When detonated in the presence of oxygen, i t produces gaseous products) and heat according to t he
following reaction.

The RDX molecule shown above is a simplified version. Here is the complete structure.
rxn
7 16
2 2
Example: Explosives

6.1.5.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170035
Use the approximate bond energies in Table to estimat e the per mole of RDX.

Given: chemical reaction, structure of reactant, and Table.
Asked for: per mole
Strategy:
A. List the types of bonds broken in RDX, along with the bond en ergy required to break each type. Multiply the number of
each type by the energy required to break one bond of t hat type and then add together the energies. Repeat this proce dure
for the bonds formed in the reaction.
B. Use Equation to calculate the amount of energy consu med or released in the reaction (Δ H).
Solution:
We must add together the energies of the bonds in t he reactants and compare that quantity with the sum o f the energies of the
bonds in the products. A nitro group (–NO) can be vi ewed as having one N–O single bond and one N=O double bon d, as
follows:
In fact, however, both N–O distances are usually the same be cause of the presence of two equivalent resonance structu res.
A We can organize our data by constructing a table:
Bonds Broken (kJ/mol) Bonds Broken (kJ/mol)
6 C–H 411 × 6 = 2466 6 C=O 799 × 6 = 4794
3 N–N 167 × 3 = 501 6 O–H 459 × 6 = 2754
3 N–O 201 × 3 = 603 Total = 10,374
3 N=O 607 × 3 = 1821
1.5 O=O 494 × 1.5 = 741
Total = 7962
B From Equation, we haverxn

6.1.5.6 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170035Thus this reaction is also highly exothermic
1-Chloro-1,1-difluoroethane (HCFC-142b) is a haloalkane with the chemical formula CH CClF. I t belongs to
the hydrochlorofluorocarbon (HCFC) family of man-made compounds that contribute significantly to both ozone
depletion and global warming when released into the environment. It is primarily used as a refrigerant where it is also known
as R-142b and by trade names including Freon -142b. The compound HCFC-142b is a hydrochlorofluorocarbon that is used
in place of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) such as the Fre ons traditionally used in refrigeration systems. HCFC-142b can be
prepared by adding HCl to 1,1-difluoroethylene:
Use tabulated bond energies (Table) to calculate for th e preparation of HCFC-142b.
Answer
−42 kJ/mol

What is the enthalpy of reaction between 1 mol of chlorin e and 1 mol methane?
Solution
We use Equation, which requires tabulating bonds broken an d formed.
Bonds broken: 1 mol of Cl-Cl bonds, 1 mol of C-H bonds
Bonds formed: 1 mol of H-Cl bonds, 1 mol of C-Cl bonds
Thus, the reaction is exothermic (because the bonds in the products are stronger than t he bonds in the reactants)
What is the enthalpy of reaction for the combustion of 1 mol of ethane?
Solution
We use Equation, which requires tabulating bonds broken an d formed.Exercise: Freon
3 2
[2]
Example: Chlorination of Methane
Example: Combustion of Ethane

6.1.5.7 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170035bonds broken: 6 moles C-H bonds, 1 mol C-C bonds, / moles of O=O bonds
bonds formed: 4 moles C=O bonds, 6 moles O-H bonds
Therefor the reaction is exothermic.
Summary
Bond order is the number of electron pairs that hold two atoms together. Single bonds have a bond order of one, and m ultiple
bonds with bond orders of two (a double bond) and thr ee (a triple bond) are quite common. In closely rel ated compounds with
bonds between the same kinds of atoms, the bond with th e highest bond order is both the shortest and the str ongest. In bonds with
the same bond order between different atoms, trends are observed that, with few exceptions, result in the st rongest single bonds
being formed between the smallest atoms. Tabulated val ues of average bond energies can be used to calculate the enthalpy change
of many chemical reactions. If the bonds in the pro ducts are stronger than those in the reactants, the r eaction is exothermic and vice
versa.
The breakage and formation of bonds is similar to a relationship: you can either get married or divorced and it is more favorable to
be married.
Energy is always released to make bonds, which is why the enthalpy change for breaking b onds is always positive.
Energy is always required to break bonds. Atoms are much happier when they are "marr ied" and release energy because it is
easier and more stable to be in a relationship (e.g., to gene rate octet electronic configurations). The enthalpy change is always
negative because the system is releasing energy when forming bond.
6.1.5: Strength of Covalent Bonds is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.72

6.1.6.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1700406.1.6: The VSEPR Model
To use the VSEPR model to predict molecular geometries.
The Lewis electron-pair approach can be used to pred ict the number and types of bonds between the atoms i n a substance, and it
indicates which atoms have lone pairs of electrons. T his approach gives no information about the actual a rrangement of atoms in
space, however. We continue our discussion of structure and bonding by introducing the valence-shell electron-pair repulsion
(VSEPR) model (pronounced “vesper”), which can be used to predict the shapes of many molecules and polyatomic ions. Keep in
mind, however, that the VSEPR model, like any model, is a limited representation of reality; the model provi des no information
about bond lengths or the presence of multiple bonds.
The VSEPR Model
The VSEPR model can predict the structure of nearly an y molecule or polyatomic ion in which the central at om is a nonmetal, as
well as the structures of many molecules and polyatomi c ions with a central metal atom. The premise of the VSEPR theory is that
electron pairs located in bonds and lone pairs repe l each other and will therefore adopt the geometry t hat places electron pairs as far
apart from each other as possible. This theory is very si mplistic and does not account for the subtleties of o rbital interactions that
influence molecular shapes; however, the simple VSEPR co unting procedure accurately predicts the three-dime nsional structures of
a large number of compounds, which cannot be predicted usi ng the Lewis electron-pair approach.
Figure: Common Structures for Molecules and Polyatomic Ions That Con sist of a Central Atom Bonded to Two or Three
Other Atoms
We can use the VSEPR model to predict the geometry of m ost polyatomic molecules and ions by focusing only o n the number of
electron pairs around the central atom, ignoring all other valence electrons present. Acco rding to this model, valence electrons in
the Lewis structure form groups, which may consist of a single bond, a double bond, a triple bond, a lone pair of electrons, or even
a single unpaired electron, which in the VSEPR model is counted as a lone pair. Because electrons repel each ot her electrostatically,
the most stable arrangement of electron groups (i.e., the one with the lowest energy) is the one that mini mizes repulsions. Groups
are positioned around the central atom in a way that produces the molecular structure with the lowest ene rgy, as illustrated in
Figures and.
Learning Objectives

6.1.6.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170040Figure: Electron Geometries for Species with Two to Six Electron Gr oups. Groups are placed around the central atom in a
way that produces a molecular structure with the lowest energy, that is, the one that minimizes repulsions.
In the VSEPR model, the molecule or polyatomic ion is given an AX E designation, where A is the central atom, X is a bonded
atom, E is a nonbonding valence electron group (usua lly a lone pair of electrons), and m and n are integers. Each group around the
central atom is designated as a bonding pair (BP) or lone (nonbonding) pair (LP). From the BP and LP intera ctions we can predict
both the relative positions of the atoms and the an gles between the bonds, called the bond angles. Using this information, we can
describe the molecular geometry, the arrangement of the bonded atoms in a molecule or polyatomic ion.
This VESPR procedure is summarized as follows:
1. Draw the Lewis electron structure of the molecule or poly atomic ion.
2. Determine the electron group arrangement around the ce ntral atom that minimizes repulsions.
3. Assign an AX E designation; then identify the LP–LP, LP–BP, o r BP–BP interactions and predict deviations from ideal
bond angles.
4. Describe the molecular geometry.
We will illustrate the use of this procedure with sev eral examples, beginning with atoms with two electron g roups. In our
discussion we will refer to Figure and Figure, which su mmarize the common molecular geometries and idealize d
bond angles of molecules and ions with two to six electron g roups.m n
VESPR Produce to predict Molecular geometry
m n

6.1.6.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170040
Figure: Common Molecular Geometries for Species with Two to Six El ectron Groups. Lone pairs are shown using a dashed
line.
Two Electron Groups
Our first example is a molecule with two bonded atoms and no lo ne pairs of electrons,.
1. The central atom, beryllium, contributes two valen ce electrons, and each hydrogen atom contributes one. The Lewis electron
structure is
2. There are two electron groups around the central atom. We see from Figure that the arrangement that mi nimizes
repulsions places the groups 180° apart.
3. Both groups around the central atom are bonding pairs (BP). Thus BeH is designated as AX.
4. From Figure we see that with two bonding pairs, the molecu lar geometry that minimizes repulsions in BeH is linear.AX Molecules: BeH2 2
2 2

6.1.6.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1700401. The central atom, carbon, contributes four valence electrons, and each oxygen atom contributes six. The Lewis electron
structure is
2. The carbon atom forms two double bonds. Each doub le bond is a group, so there are two electron groups ar ound the central
atom. Like BeH, the arrangement that minimizes repulsions pl aces the groups 180° apart.
3. Once again, both groups around the central atom are bondin g pairs (BP), so CO is designated as AX.
4. VSEPR only recognizes groups around the central atom. Thus the lone pairs on the oxygen atoms do n ot influence the
molecular geometry. With two bonding pairs on the cen tral atom and no lone pairs, the molecular geometry of CO is linear
(Figure). The structure of is shown in Figure.
Three Electron Groups
1. The central atom, boron, contributes three valen ce electrons, and each chlorine atom contributes sev en valence electrons.
The Lewis electron structure is
2. There are three electron groups around the centr al atom. To minimize repulsions, the groups are placed 120° apart (Figure
3. All electron groups are bonding pairs (BP), so the s tructure is designated as AX.
4. From Figure we see that with three bonding pairs aro und the central atom, the molecular geometry of BCl is trigonal
planar, as shown in Figure.
1. The central atom, carbon, has four valence electro ns, and each oxygen atom has six valence electrons. As you learned
previously, the Lewis electron structure of one of three r esonance forms is represented as
2. The structure of CO is a resonance hybrid. It has three identical bonds, each with a bond order of. We minimize
repulsions by placing the three groups 120° apart (Figur e).
3. All electron groups are bonding pairs (BP). With thr ee bonding groups around the central atom, the stru cture is designated as
AX.
4. We see from Figure that the molecular geometry of C O is trigonal planar with bond angles of 120°.AX Molecules: CO2 2
2 2
AX Molecules: BCl3 3
AX Molecules: CO3 32−
32−
32−

6.1.6.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170040
In our next example we encounter the effects of lone pai rs and multiple bonds on molecular geometry for the first time.
1. The central atom, sulfur, has 6 valence electron s, as does each oxygen atom. With 18 valence electrons, the Lewis electron
structure is shown below.
2. There are three electron groups around the centr al atom, two double bonds and one lone pair. We initia lly place the groups in
a trigonal planar arrangement to minimize repulsions (Figu re).
3. There are two bonding pairs and one lone pair, so the structure is designated as AX E. This designation h as a total of three
electron pairs, two X and one E. Because a lone pair is n ot shared by two nuclei, it occupies more space near the central atom
than a bonding pair (Figure). Thus bonding pairs an d lone pairs repel each other electrostatically in the order BP–BP <
LP–BP < LP–LP. In SO, we have one BP–BP interaction and two LP–BP interactions.
4. The molecular geometry is described only by the p ositions of the nuclei, not by the positions of the lone pairs. Thus with two
nuclei and one lone pair the shape is bent, or V shaped, which can be viewed as a trigonal planar arrangement with a missing
vertex (Figures and). The O-S-O bond angle is expected to be less than 120° because of the extra space taken up
by the lone pair.
Figure: The Difference in the Space Occupied by a Lone Pair of Elec trons and by a Bonding Pair
As with SO, this composite model of electron distributi on and negative electrostatic potential in ammonia shows that a lone
pair of electrons occupies a larger region of space ar ound the nitrogen atom than does a bonding pair of electrons that is shared
with a hydrogen atom.
Like lone pairs of electrons, multiple bonds occupy more space around the central atom than a single bon d, which can cause
other bond angles to be somewhat smaller than expected. This is because a multiple bond has a higher elect ron density than a
single bond, so its electrons occupy more space than t hose of a single bond. For example, in a molecule suc h as CH O (AX),AX E Molecules: SO2 2
2 3

6.1.6.6 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170040whose structure is shown below, the double bond repels t he single bonds more strongly than the single bonds repel each other.
This causes a deviation from ideal geometry (an H–C–H bond angle of 116.5° rather than 120°).
Four Electron Groups
One of the limitations of Lewis structures is that th ey depict molecules and ions in only two dimensions. With four electron groups,
we must learn to show molecules and ions in three dimensions.
1. The central atom, carbon, contributes four valence electrons, and each hydrogen atom has one valence electron, so the full
Lewis electron structure is
2. There are four electron groups around the centra l atom. As shown in Figure, repulsions are minimized by placing the
groups in the corners of a tetrahedron with bond angles of 109.5°.
3. All electron groups are bonding pairs, so the structu re is designated as AX.
4. With four bonding pairs, the molecular geometry of me thane is tetrahedral (Figure).
1. In ammonia, the central atom, nitrogen, has five v alence electrons and each hydrogen donates one valen ce electron,
producing the Lewis electron structure
2. There are four electron groups around nitrogen, three bonding pairs and one lone pair. Repulsions ar e minimized by
directing each hydrogen atom and the lone pair to the co rners of a tetrahedron.
3. With three bonding pairs and one lone pair, the structure is designated as AX E. This designation has a t otal of four electron
pairs, three X and one E. We expect the LP–BP interacti ons to cause the bonding pair angles to deviate signi ficantly from theAX Molecules: CH4 4
AX E Molecules: NH3 3

6.1.6.7 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170040angles of a perfect tetrahedron.
4. There are three nuclei and one lone pair, so the molecular geometry is trigonal pyramidal. In essence, this is a tetrahedron
with a vertex missing (Figure). However, the H–N–H bond an gles are less than the ideal angle of 109.5° because of LP–
BP repulsions (Figure and Figure).
1. Oxygen has six valence electrons and each hydrogen has one valence electron, producing the Lewis electron structure
2. There are four groups around the central oxygen atom, two bonding pairs and two lone pairs. Repulsions are minimized by
directing the bonding pairs and the lone pairs to t he corners of a tetrahedron Figure.
3. With two bonding pairs and two lone pairs, the stru cture is designated as AX E with a total of four electro n pairs. Due to
LP–LP, LP–BP, and BP–BP interactions, we expect a significan t deviation from idealized tetrahedral angles.
4. With two hydrogen atoms and two lone pairs of elec trons, the structure has significant lone pair intera ctions. There are two
nuclei about the central atom, so the molecular shap e is bent, or V shaped, with an H–O–H angle that is even less than the H–
N–H angles in NH, as we would expect because of the prese nce of two lone pairs of electrons on the central atom rather than
one. This molecular shape is essentially a tetrahedron wit h two missing vertices.
Five Electron Groups
In previous examples it did not matter where we placed the electron groups because all positions were equiv alent. In some cases,
however, the positions are not equivalent. We encounter thi s situation for the first time with five electron groups.
1. Phosphorus has five valence electrons and each chlo rine has seven valence electrons, so the Lewis electron structure of PCl
is
2. There are five bonding groups around phosphorus, the central atom. The structure that minimizes repu lsions is a trigonal
bipyramid, which consists of two trigonal pyramids that share a bas e (Figure):
3. All electron groups are bonding pairs, so the structu re is designated as AX. There are no lone pair interacti ons.
4. The molecular geometry of PCl is trigonal bipyramidal, as shown in Figure. The molecule has three atoms in a plane
in equatorial positions and two atoms above and below the plane in axial positions. The three equatorial positions are
separated by 120° from one another, and the two axia l positions are at 90° to the equatorial plane. The a xial and equatorial
positions are not chemically equivalent, as we will see in ou r next example.AX E Molecules: H O2 2 2
2 2
AX Molecules: PCl5 5

6.1.6.8 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170040
1. The sulfur atom has six valence electrons and each fluo rine has seven valence electrons, so the Lewis electron stru cture is
With an expanded valence, this species is an exception to the octet rule.
2. There are five groups around sulfur, four bondin g pairs and one lone pair. With five electron groups, the lowest energy
arrangement is a trigonal bipyramid, as shown in Figure.
3. We designate SF as AX E; it has a total of five ele ctron pairs. However, because the axial and equatorial positions are not
chemically equivalent, where do we place the lone pair? If we place the lone pair in the axial position, we have three LP–BP
repulsions at 90°. If we place it in the equatorial po sition, we have two 90° LP–BP repulsions at 90°. With f ewer 90° LP–BP
repulsions, we can predict that the structure with the l one pair of electrons in the equatorial position is more stable than the one
with the lone pair in the axial position. We also expect a deviation from ideal geometry bec ause a lone pair of electrons
occupies more space than a bonding pair.
Figure: Illustration of the Area Shared by Two Electron Pairs versu s the Angle between Them
At 90°, the two electron pairs share a relatively larg e region of space, which leads to strong repulsive ele ctron–electron
interactions.
4. With four nuclei and one lone pair of electrons, th e molecular structure is based on a trigonal bipyram id with a missing
equatorial vertex; it is described as a seesaw. The F –S–F angle is 173° rather than 180° because o f the lone pair of
electrons in the equatorial plane.AX E Molecules: SF4 4
4 4
axial axial

6.1.6.9 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170040
1. The bromine atom has seven valence electrons, an d each fluorine has seven valence electrons, so the L ewis electron
structure is
Once again, we have a compound that is an exception to the octet rule.
2. There are five groups around the central atom, th ree bonding pairs and two lone pairs. We again direct the groups toward the
vertices of a trigonal bipyramid.
3. With three bonding pairs and two lone pairs, the s tructural designation is AX E with a total of five ele ctron pairs. Because
the axial and equatorial positions are not equivalen t, we must decide how to arrange the groups to minimiz e repulsions. If we
place both lone pairs in the axial positions, we have six LP–BP repulsions at 90°. If both are in the equator ial positions, we
have four LP–BP repulsions at 90°. If one lone pair is axial and the other equatorial, we have one LP–LP r epulsion at 90° and
three LP–BP repulsions at 90°:
Structure (c) can be eliminated because it has a LP–L P interaction at 90°. Structure (b), with fewer LP–BP re pulsions at 90°
than (a), is lower in energy. However, we predict a devia tion in bond angles because of the presence of the t wo lone pairs of
electrons.
4. The three nuclei in BrF determine its molecular st ructure, which is described as T shaped. This is essentially a trigonal
bipyramid that is missing two equatorial vertices. The F –Br–F angle is 172°, less than 180° because of LP–BP
repulsions (Figure.1).AX E Molecules: BrF3 2 3
3 2
axial axial

6.1.6.10 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170040Because lone pairs occupy more space around the centra l atom than bonding pairs, electrostatic repulsions are more
important for lone pairs than for bonding pairs.
1. Each iodine atom contributes seven electrons and the negative charge one, so the Lewis electron structure is
2. There are five electron groups about the central atom in I, two bonding pairs and three lone pairs. To minimize repulsions,
the groups are directed to the corners of a trigonal bipy ramid.
3. With two bonding pairs and three lone pairs, I has a total of five electron pairs and is designated as AX E. We must now
decide how to arrange the lone pairs of electrons in a trigonal bipyramid in a way that minimizes repulsi ons. Placing them in
the axial positions eliminates 90° LP–LP repulsions and mi nimizes the number of 90° LP–BP repulsions.
The three lone pairs of electrons have equivalent int eractions with the three iodine atoms, so we do not exp ect any deviations in
bonding angles.
4. With three nuclei and three lone pairs of electr ons, the molecular geometry of I is linear. This can be described as a
trigonal bipyramid with three equatorial vertices missing. The ion has an I–I–I angle of 180°, as expected.
Six Electron Groups
Six electron groups form an octahedron, a polyhedron made of identical equilateral triang les and six identical vertices (Figure
1. The central atom, sulfur, contributes six valence electrons, and each fluorine atom has seven valence electrons, so the Lewis
electron structure is
With an expanded valence, this species is an exception to the octet rule.
2. There are six electron groups around the central atom, each a bonding pair. We see from Figure that t he geometry that
minimizes repulsions is octahedral.
3. With only bonding pairs, SF is designated as AX. All p ositions are chemically equivalent, so all electroni c interactions are
equivalent.AX E Molecules: I2 3 3−
3−
3−2 3
3−
AX Molecules: SF6 6
6 6

6.1.6.11 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1700404. There are six nuclei, so the molecular geometry of SF is octahedral.
1. The central atom, bromine, has seven valence electr ons, as does each fluorine, so the Lewis electron structur e is
With its expanded valence, this species is an exception to the octet rule.
2. There are six electron groups around the Br, five bonding pairs and one lone pair. Placing five F atoms around Br while
minimizing BP–BP and LP–BP repulsions gives the following struc ture:
3. With five bonding pairs and one lone pair, BrF is designated as AX E; it has a total of six electron pair s. The BrF structure
has four fluorine atoms in a plane in an equatorial position and one fluorine atom and the lone pair of electrons in the axial
positions. We expect all F –Br–F angles to be less than 90° because of the lone pair of electrons, which occu pies
more space than the bonding electron pairs.
4. With five nuclei surrounding the central atom, the molecular structure is based on an octahedron with a vertex missing. This
molecular structure is square pyramidal. The F –B–F angles are 85.1°, less than 90° because of LP–BP repulsions.
1. The central atom, iodine, contributes seven electro ns. Each chlorine contributes seven, and there is a si ngle negative charge.
The Lewis electron structure is6
AX E Molecules: BrF5 5
5 5 5
axial equatorial
axial equatorial
AX E Molecules: ICl4 2 4−

6.1.6.12 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170040
2. There are six electron groups around the central atom, four bonding pairs and two lone pairs. The struct ure that minimizes
LP–LP, LP–BP, and BP–BP repulsions is
3. ICl is designated as AX E and has a total of six el ectron pairs. Although there are lone pairs of electro ns, with four
bonding electron pairs in the equatorial plane and t he lone pairs of electrons in the axial positions, all LP–BP repulsions are the
same. Therefore, we do not expect any deviation in the Cl –I–Cl bond angles.
4. With five nuclei, the ICl4− ion forms a molecular structure that is square planar, an octahedron with two opposite vertices
missing.
The relationship between the number of electron grou ps around a central atom, the number of lone pairs o f electrons, and the
molecular geometry is summarized in Figure.4−4 2

6.1.6.13 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170040
Figure: Overview of Molecular Geometries
Using the VSEPR model, predict the molecular geometry of e ach molecule or ion.
1. PF (phosphorus pentafluoride, a catalyst used in certa in organic reactions)
2. H O (hydronium ion)
Given: two chemical species
Asked for: molecular geometry
Strategy:
A. Draw the Lewis electron structure of the molecule or polya tomic ion.
B. Determine the electron group arrangement around the c entral atom that minimizes repulsions.
C. Assign an AX E designation; then identify the LP–LP, LP–BP, or BP–BP interactions and predict deviations in bond
angles.
D. Describe the molecular geometry.
Solution:
1. A The central atom, P, has five valence electrons and each fluorine has seven valence electrons, so the Lewis structure of
PF isExample
3+
m n

6.1.6.14 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170040
B There are five bonding groups about phosphorus. The structure that minimizes repulsions is a trigonal b ipyramid (Figure
C All electron groups are bonding pairs, so PF is designat ed as AX. Notice that this gives a total of five elec tron pairs.
With no lone pair repulsions, we do not expect any bond an gles to deviate from the ideal.
D The PF molecule has five nuclei and no lone pairs of elec trons, so its molecular geometry is trigonal bipyramida l.
2. A The central atom, O, has six valence electrons, and each H at om contributes one valence electron. Subtracting one
electron for the positive charge gives a total of eight val ence electrons, so the Lewis electron structure is
B There are four electron groups around oxygen, three bonding pairs and one lone pair. Like NH, repulsions are minimized
by directing each hydrogen atom and the lone pair to the corners of a tetrahedron.
C With three bonding pairs and one lone pair, the st ructure is designated as AX E and has a total of four e lectron pairs
(three X and one E). We expect the LP–BP interactions to cause the bonding pair angles to deviate signifi cantly from the
angles of a perfect tetrahedron.
D There are three nuclei and one lone pair, so the mo lecular geometry is trigonal pyramidal, in essence a tetrahedron
missing a vertex. However, the H–O–H bond angles are less than the ideal angle of 109.5° because of LP–BP repulsions:
Using the VSEPR model, predict the molecular geometry of e ach molecule or ion.
a. XeO
b. PF
c. NO
Answer a
trigonal pyramidal
Answer b
octahedral5 5
Exercise
6−
2+

6.1.6.15 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170040Answer c
linear
Predict the molecular geometry of each molecule.
1. XeF
2. SnCl
Given: two chemical compounds
Asked for: molecular geometry
Strategy:
Use the strategy given in Example.
Solution:
1. A Xenon contributes eight electrons and each fluorine se ven valence electrons, so the Lewis electron structure is
B There are five electron groups around the central atom, two bonding pairs and three lone pairs. Repuls ions are minimized
by placing the groups in the corners of a trigonal bipyrami d.
C From B, XeF is designated as AX E and has a total of f ive electron pairs (two X and three E). With three lon e pairs
about the central atom, we can arrange the two F atoms in three possible ways: both F atoms can be axial, one can be axial
and one equatorial, or both can be equatorial:
The structure with the lowest energy is the one that m inimizes LP–LP repulsions. Both (b) and (c) have two 90° LP–LP
interactions, whereas structure (a) has none. Thus both F atoms are in the axial positions, like the two iodi ne atoms around
the central iodine in I. All LP–BP interactions are e quivalent, so we do not expect a deviation from an id eal 180° in the F–
Xe–F bond angle.
D With two nuclei about the central atom, the molecula r geometry of XeF is linear. It is a trigonal bipyram id with three
missing equatorial vertices.
2. A The tin atom donates 4 valence electrons and each chlo rine atom donates 7 valence electrons. With 18 valence electrons,
the Lewis electron structure is
B There are three electron groups around the central atom, two bonding groups and one lone pair of electro ns. To minimize
repulsions the three groups are initially placed at 120° an gles from each other.Example
2 2 3
3−

6.1.6.16 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170040C From B we designate SnCl as AX E. It has a total of thre e electron pairs, two X and one E. Because the lone pair of
electrons occupies more space than the bonding pairs, we expect a decrease in the Cl–Sn–Cl bond angle due to increased
LP–BP repulsions.
D With two nuclei around the central atom and one lon e pair of electrons, the molecular geometry of SnCl i s bent, like
SO, but with a Cl–Sn–Cl bond angle of 95°. The molecul ar geometry can be described as a trigonal planar ar rangement
with one vertex missing.
Predict the molecular geometry of each molecule.
a. SO
b. XeF
Answer a
trigonal planar
Answer b
square planar
Molecules with No Single Central Atom
The VSEPR model can be used to predict the structure of somewhat more complex molecules with no single centra l atom by
treating them as linked AX E fragments. We will demons trate with methyl isocyanate (CH –N=C=O), a volatile an d highly toxic
molecule that is used to produce the pesticide Sevin. I n 1984, large quantities of Sevin were accidentally r eleased in Bhopal, India,
when water leaked into storage tanks. The resulting hi ghly exothermic reaction caused a rapid increase in p ressure that ruptured the
tanks, releasing large amounts of methyl isocyanate th at killed approximately 3800 people and wholly or par tially disabled about
50,000 others. In addition, there was significant damage t o livestock and crops.
We can treat methyl isocyanate as linked AX E fragmen ts beginning with the carbon atom at the left, which i s connected to three
H atoms and one N atom by single bonds. The four bonds around carbon mean that it must be surrounded by fo ur bonding electron
pairs in a configuration similar to AX. We can theref ore predict the CH –N portion of the molecule to be ro ughly tetrahedral,
similar to methane:
The nitrogen atom is connected to one carbon by a si ngle bond and to the other carbon by a double bond, producing a total of three
bonds, C–N=C. For nitrogen to have an octet of electrons, it mu st also have a lone pair:
Because multiple bonds are not shown in the VSEPR model, the nitrogen is effectively surrounded by three ele ctron pairs. Thus
according to the VSEPR model, the C–N=C fragment should be ben t with an angle less than 120°.
The carbon in the –N=C=O fragment is doubly bonded to both nitrogen and oxygen, which in the VSEPR model giv es carbon a
total of two electron pairs. The N=C=O angle should th erefore be 180°, or linear. The three fragments combin e to give the
following structure:2 2
Exercise
m n 3
m n
4 3

6.1.6.17 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170040
We predict that all four nonhydrogen atoms lie in a single plane, with a C–N–C angle of approximately 120 °. The experimentally
determined structure of methyl isocyanate confirms our pr ediction (Figure).
Figure: The Experimentally Determined Structure of Methyl Isocyan ate
Certain patterns are seen in the structures of moder ately complex molecules. For example, carbon atoms wi th four bonds (such as
the carbon on the left in methyl isocyanate) are gen erally tetrahedral. Similarly, the carbon atom on the right has two double bonds
that are similar to those in CO, so its geometry, lik e that of CO, is linear. Recognizing similarities t o simpler molecules will help
you predict the molecular geometries of more complex molecules.
Use the VSEPR model to predict the molecular geometry of prop yne (H C–C≡CH), a gas with some anesthetic properties.
Given: chemical compound
Asked for: molecular geometry
Strategy:
Count the number of electron groups around each car bon, recognizing that in the VSEPR model, a multiple bo nd counts as a
single group. Use Figure to determine the molecular geometry around each carbon atom and then deduce th e structure of
the molecule as a whole.
Solution:
Because the carbon atom on the left is bonded to fo ur other atoms, we know that it is approximately tetr ahedral. The next two
carbon atoms share a triple bond, and each has an ad ditional single bond. Because a multiple bond is coun ted as a single bond
in the VSEPR model, each carbon atom behaves as if it had two electron groups. This means that both of the se carbons are
linear, with C–C≡C and C≡C–H angles of 180°.
Predict the geometry of allene (H C=C=CH), a compound wi th narcotic properties that is used to make more co mplex organic
molecules.
Answer
The terminal carbon atoms are trigonal planar, the cent ral carbon is linear, and the C–C–C angle is 180°.
Summary
Lewis electron structures give no information about molecular geometry, the arrangement of bonded atoms in a molecule or
polyatomic ion, which is crucial to understanding the chemistry of a molecule. The valence-shell electron-pair repulsion
(VSEPR) model allows us to predict which of the possible structures is actually observed in most cases. It is based on the2 2
Example
Exercise
2 2

6.1.6.18 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170040assumption that pairs of electrons occupy space, and the lowest-energy structure is the one that minimizes electron pair–electron
pair repulsions. In the VSEPR model, the molecule or p olyatomic ion is given an AX E designation, where A is th e central atom,
X is a bonded atom, E is a nonbonding valence electron group (usually a lone pair of electrons), and m and n are integers. Each
group around the central atom is designated as a bo nding pair (BP) or lone (nonbonding) pair (LP). From the BP and LP
interactions we can predict both the relative positi ons of the atoms and the angles between the bonds, call ed the bond angles. From
this we can describe the molecular geometry. The VSEPR model can be used to predict the shapes of many molecules and
polyatomic ions, but it gives no information about b ond lengths and the presence of multiple bonds. A c ombination of VSEPR and
a bonding model, such as Lewis electron structures, is necessa ry to understand the presence of multiple bonds.
6.1.6: The VSEPR Model is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.m n

6.1.7.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1700416.1.7: Molecular Polarity
To predict whether a molecule is polar or non-polar
Introduction to Molecular Polarity
You have already seen that covalent bonds are polar when they link two different atoms. In a polar bond, one atom is positively
charged and the other is negatively charged. A molecule (or polyatomic ion) is polar when one side of the m olecule is more
positive (or more negative) than the other. This occurs wh en the polarities of the bonds do not cancel out.
For example in CO, each carbon-oxygen bond is polar, but CO is a nonpolar molecule. The molecule is linear, so the two bonds
point in opposite directions. They are equally pola r, so their effects cancel out. The two sides of the mol ecule are identical; neither
one is more negative than the other.
On the other hand, OCS is a polar molecule. This molecule is also linear, but the C=O and C=S bon ds are not equally polar,
because O is more electronegative than S. In this molecul e, the oxygen side is more negative than the sulfur side.
Water is also polar, but for a different reason. In this case, the two bonds are equally polar, but they do not cancel each other out,
because they do not point in opposite directions. Wat er is a bent molecule, so the O –H bonds are roughly 109. 5˚ apart (actually
about 105˚). In the drawing below, the left side of the molecule is positively charged and the right side is neg atively charged.
As a general rule, molecules that are distorted are also polar. The only exceptions are linear molecules in which the outer atoms
are dissimilar; these molecules are not distorted, but the y are polar. OCS (above) is an example.
Polar Molecules Have a Net Dipole Moment
Molecular polarity can be described more formerly in terms of the summation of bond dipole moments. In complex molecules
with polar covalent bonds, the three-dimensional geom etry and the compound’s symmetry determine whether th ere is a net dipole
moment. Mathematically, dipole moments are vectors; they possess both a magnitude and a direction. The dipole moment of a
molecule is therefore the vector sum of the dipole moments of the individual bonds in th e molecule. If the individual bond dipole
moments cancel one another, there is no net dipole m oment. Such is the case for CO, a linear molecule (Fi gure). Each C–
O bond in CO is polar, yet experiments show that the CO molecule has no dipole moment. Because the two C–O bond dipoles in
CO are equal in magnitude and oriented at 180° to e ach other, they cancel. As a result, the CO molecule has no net dipole
moment even though it has a substantial separation of charge. In contrast, the H O molecule is not linear (Fi gure); it is bent
in three-dimensional space, so the dipole moments do not cancel each other. Thus a molecule such as H O has a n et dipole moment.
We expect the concentration of negative charge to b e on the oxygen, the more electronegative atom, and positive charge on the two
hydrogens. This charge polarization allows H O to hydro gen-bond to other polarized or charged species, inc luding other water
molecules.Learning Objectives
2 2
2 2
2 2

6.1.7.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170041
Figure: How Individual Bond Dipole Moments Are Added Together to Give an Overall Molecular Dipole Moment for Two
Triatomic Molecules with Different Structures. (a) In CO, the C–O bond dipoles are equal in magnitude but oriented in opposite
directions (at 180°). Their vector sum is zero, so CO t herefore has no net dipole. (b) In H O, the O–H bond dipoles are also equal
in magnitude, but they are oriented at 104.5° to ea ch other. Hence the vector sum is not zero, and H O ha s a net dipole moment.
Other examples of molecules with polar bonds are shown i n Figure. In molecular geometries that are highly sym metrical
(most notably tetrahedral and square planar, trigonal bipyramidal, and octahedral), individual bond dipole moments completely
cancel, and there is no net dipole moment. Although a molecule like CHCl is best described as tetrahedral, the atoms bonded to
carbon are not identical. Consequently, the bond dipo le moments cannot cancel one another, and the molecu le has a dipole moment.
Due to the arrangement of the bonds in molecules tha t have V-shaped, trigonal pyramidal, seesaw, T-shaped, and square pyramidal
geometries, the bond dipole moments cannot cancel o ne another. Consequently, molecules with these geometri es always have a
nonzero dipole moment.
Figure: Molecules with Polar Bonds. Individual bond di pole moments are indicated in red. Due to their diff erent threedimensional structures, some molecules with polar bonds h ave a net dipole moment (HCl, CH O, NH, and CHCl), i ndicated in
blue, whereas others do not because the bond dipole mo ments cancel (BCl, CCl, PF, and SF).
Molecules with asymmetrical charge distributions have a net dipole moment.
Which molecule(s) has a net dipole moment?
a.
b.
c.
Given: three chemical compounds
Asked for: net dipole moment
Strategy:
For each three-dimensional molecular geometry, predict whether the bond dipoles cancel. If they do not, the n the molecule has
a net dipole moment.
Solution:
1. The total number of electrons around the central atom, S, is eight, which gives four electron pairs. Two of these ele ctron
pairs are bonding pairs and two are lone pairs, so the molec ular geometry of is bent (Figure). The bond dipoles
cannot cancel one another, so the molecule has a net dipol e moment.
2 2
2 3 3
3 4 5 6
Example

6.1.7.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1700412. Difluoroamine has a trigonal pyramidal molecular geomet ry. Because there is one hydrogen and two fluorines, and because
of the lone pair of electrons on nitrogen, the molecule i s not symmetrical, and the bond dipoles of NHF cannot can cel one
another. This means that NHF has a net dipole moment. We exp ect polarization from the two fluorine atoms, the most
electronegative atoms in the periodic table, to have a greater affect on the net dipole moment than polarizati on from the
lone pair of electrons on nitrogen.
3. The molecular geometry of BF is trigonal planar. Beca use all the B–F bonds are equal and the molecule is high ly
symmetrical, the dipoles cancel one another in three-dim ensional space. Thus BF has a net dipole moment of zero:
Which molecule(s) has a net dipole moment?
Answer
and
Summary
Molecules with polar covalent bonds can have a dipole moment, an asymmetrical distribution of charge that result s in a tendency
for molecules to align themselves in an applied elec tric field. Any diatomic molecule with a polar covale nt bond has a dipole
moment, but in polyatomic molecules, the presence or a bsence of a net dipole moment depends on the struct ure. For some highly
symmetrical structures, the individual bond dipole mome nts cancel one another, giving a dipole moment of zero.
6.1.7: Molecular Polarity is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.2
Exercise

6.1.8.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/5170226.1.8: A Different Perspective on Drawing Lewis Structures
Recognize that using formal charges to determine how many b onds to make, is different perspective on
drawing Lewis Structures.
Using formal charges to determine how many bonds to make, a different perspective...
If we draw the Lewis structure for PO ion using the rules you’ve seen earlier, we come up with the structure bel ow. It has the
correct number of electrons (32), and every atom satisfi es the octet rule.

However, many textbooks (and websites) insist that the structure below is a better one, even though the phos phorus atom has ten
electrons around it:

The first structure follows the rules for drawing structu res. So why do chemists add a double bond? To understan d, we need the
formal charges on the atoms in each structure…
Many chemists prefer the second structure because it gives us a couple of zeroes. However, the phosphorus ato m in the second
structure violates the octet rule. So which structure is best?? The answer is that either structure is legitimate. Both structures give
us all of the information we need about phosphate ion; they allow us to predict the shape of the molecule, the angles between the
bonds, and whether the molecule is polar.
So which structure should YOU draw on a test? Be sure to check with your instructor, but most will accept eith er one. However, the
first structure is easier to figure out, because it’s the structure you produce when you follo w the provided rules. The second
structure requires more work. Therefore, we recommend t hat when you draw a structure that satisfies the octet rule, you stop there
without adding more bonds.
WARNING: Some students come to Chem 101A having been taught to draw Lewis st ructures with extra double bonds.Learning Objectives
43–

6.1.8.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/517022 If you’re familiar with Lewis structures and you like the extr a bonds… congratulations! You have less to learn – you alr eady know
all of this stuff.
BUT …
If you draw structures with extra bonds, they have to be correct. For example, a structure for phosphate tha t has two double bonds
is not acceptable.
Also, a structure for nitrate ion (NO) that has two do uble bonds is not acceptable, even though it gives y ou more zeroes. The
structure with one double bond is the only acceptable one.
If you don’t know why the structures I’ve labeled “un acceptable” are not allowed, don’t risk losing point s by adding extra bonds
when the central atom already has eight electrons.
Using formal charges to evaluate which is the best central atom...
Generally, you are told which atom is the central bondin g atom in the molecule. However, if it is unclear, or i f you are asked to
decide which atom is central, formal charges can be used to decide. The following is an example.
Example: calculating the formal charges in HCN and HNC
For the arrangement HCN, the Lewis structure: H–C N:
The formal charges work out as follows:
For the arrangement HNC, the Lewis structure: H–N C:
The formal charges work out as follows:
Both Lewis structures have a net formal charge of zero, but note that the formal ch arges on the first structure are all zero! Thus the
first Lewis structure is predicted to be more stable, and it is, in fact, the structure observed experiment ally. In general, the closer the
formal charges are to zero, the more stable the struc ture. Remember, though, that formal charges do not represent the actual charges
on atoms in a molecule or ion. They are used simply as a book-keeping method for predicting the most stable Lewis structure for a
compound.
Summary
3–

6.1.8.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/517022References

Contributors and Attributions
James Armstrong, City College of San Francisco
Torrey Glenn, City College of San Francisco

6.1.8: A Different Perspective on Drawing Lewis Struct ures is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by LibreTexts.

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
6.2: Orbitals and Bonding Theories
6.2.1: Localized Electron Model of Covalent Bonding
6.2.2: Hybrid Atomic Orbitals
6.2.3: Orbital Overlap in Multiple Bonds
6.2.4: Molecular Orbital Theory
6.2: Orbitals and Bonding Theories is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

6.2.1.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1700426.2.1: Localized Electron Model of Covalent Bonding
To describe the bonding in simple compounds using valence bond theory.
Although the VSEPR model is a simple and useful method for qualitatively predicting the structures of a wid e range of compounds,
it is not infallible. It predicts, for example, that H S and PH should have structures similar to those of and, re spectively.
In fact, structural studies have shown that the H–S–H and H–P–H angles are more than 12° smaller than the corres ponding bond
angles in and. More disturbing, the VSEPR model predic ts that the simple group 2 halides (MX), which have fo ur
valence electrons, should all have linear X–M–X geometr ies. Instead, many of these species, including and, are
significantly bent. A more sophisticated treatment of bonding is needed for systems such as these. In this sec tion, we present a
quantum mechanical description of bonding, in which bonding electrons are viewed as being localized between the nuclei of the
bonded atoms. The overlap of bonding orbitals is subs tantially increased through a process called hybridization, which results in
the formation of stronger bonds.
Introduction
As we have talked about using Lewis structures to depict the bonding in covalent compounds, we have been ver y vague in our
language about the actual nature of the chemical bo nds themselves. We know that a covalent bond involves t he ‘sharing’ of a pair
of electrons between two atoms - but how does this happ en, and how does it lead to the formation of a bond h olding the two atoms
together?
The valence bond theory is introduced to describe bonding in covalent mole cules. In this model, bonds are considered to form
from the overlapping of two atomic orbitals on differ ent atoms, each orbital containing a single electro n. In looking at simple
inorganic molecules such as H or HF, our present unders tanding of s and p atomic orbitals will suffice. To explain the bonding in
organic molecules, however, we will need to introduce the con cept of hybrid orbitals.
Example: The H molecule
The simplest case to consider is the hydrogen molec ule, H. When we say that the two electrons from each of the hydrogen atoms
are shared to form a covalent bond between the two at oms, what we mean in valence bond theory terms is that the two spherical 1 s
orbitals overlap, allowing the two electrons to form a pair within the two overlapping orbitals. In simple terms, we can say that both
electrons now spend more time between the two nuclei and thus hold the atoms together. As we will see, the situation is not quite so
simple as that, because the electron pair must still obey quantum mechanics - that is, the two electrons mu st now occupy a shared
orbital space. This will be the essential principle of valence bond th eory.
These two electrons are now attracted to the positive charge of both of the hydrogen nuclei, with the resu lt that they serve as a sort
of ‘chemical glue’ holding the two nuclei together.
How far apart are the two nuclei? That is a very impor tant issue to consider. If they are too far apart, thei r respective 1 s orbitals
cannot overlap, and thus no covalent bond can form - they are still just two separate hydrogen atoms. As t hey move closer and
closer together, orbital overlap begins to occur, and a bond begins to form. This lowers the potential ener gy of the system, as new,
attractive positive-negative electrostatic interactions becom e possible between the nucleus of one atom and the ele ctron of the
second. However, something else is happening at the same t ime: as the atoms get closer, the repulsive positive-positive interaction
between the two nuclei also begins to increase.Learning Objectives
2 3

6.2.1.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170042
At first this repulsion is more than offset by the a ttraction between nuclei and electrons, but at a cer tain point, as the nuclei get even
closer, the repulsive forces begin to overcome the att ractive forces, and the potential energy of the syst em rises quickly. When the
two nuclei are ‘too close’, we have a very unstable, h igh-energy situation. There is a defined optimal dist ance between the nuclei in
which the potential energy is at a minimum, meaning that the combined attractive and repulsive forces ad d up to the greatest
overall attractive force. This optimal internuclear distance is the bond length. For the H molecule, this distance is 74 x 10
meters, or 0.74 Å (Å means angstrom, or 10 meters). Lik ewise, the difference in potential energy between the lowest state (at the
optimal internuclear distance) and the state where t he two atoms are completely separated is called the bond energy. For the
hydrogen molecule, this energy is equal to about 104 kcal/ mol.
Every covalent bond in a given molecule has a chara cteristic length and strength. In general, carbon-carbo n single bonds are about
1.5 Å long (Å means angstrom, or 10 meters) while carbo n-carbon double bonds are about 1.3 Å, carbon-oxygen double bonds
are about 1.2 Å, and carbon-hydrogen bonds are in the range of 1.0 – 1.1 Å. Most covalent bonds in organic mol ecules range in
strength from just under 100 kcal/mole (for a carbo n-hydrogen bond in ethane, for example) up to nearly 200 kcal/mole. You can
refer to tables in reference books such as the CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics for extensive lists o f bond lengths,
strengths, and many other data for specific organic compo unds.
Although we tend to talk about "bond length" as a spec ific distance, it is not accurate to picture covalent bonds as rigid sticks
of unchanging length - rather, it is better to pict ure them as springs which have a defined length when relaxed, but which c an
be compressed, extended, and bent. This ‘springy’ p icture of covalent bonds will become very important, when we study the
analytical technique known as infrared (IR) spectroscop y.
Valence Bond Theory: A Localized Bonding Approach
You learned that as two hydrogen atoms approach each other from an infinite distance, the energy of the sy stem reaches a
minimum. This region of minimum energy in the energ y diagram corresponds to the formation of a covalent bond between the two
atoms at an H–H distance of 74 pm (Figure). According to quantum mechanics, bonds form between atoms because their
atomic orbitals overlap, with each region of overlap accommodating a maximum of two electrons with opposite spin, in accordance
with the Pauli principle. In this case, a bond forms be tween the two hydrogen atoms when the singly occupied 1 s atomic orbital of
one hydrogen atom overlaps with the singly occupied 1s atomic orbital of a second hydrogen atom. Electron density between the
nuclei is increased because of this orbital overlap an d results in a localized electron-pair bond (Figure).2-12
-10
-10
Balls and Springs

6.2.1.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170042
Figure: Overlap of Two Singly Occupied Hydrogen 1s Atomic O rbitals Produces an H–H Bond in H The formation of H
from two hydrogen atoms, each with a single electron in a 1s orbital, occurs as the electrons are shared to fo rm an electron-pair
bond, as indicated schematically by the gray spheres and black arrows. The orange electron density distributions sh ow that the
formation of an H molecule increases the electron densi ty in the region between the two positively charged nuclei.
Although Lewis and VSEPR structures also contain localized electron-pair bonds, neither description uses an at omic orbital
approach to predict the stability of the bond. Doing s o forms the basis for a description of chemical bon ding known as valence
bond theory, which is built on two assumptions:
1. The strength of a covalent bond is proportional to the amount of overlap between atomic orbitals; that is, the greater the overlap,
the more stable the bond.
2. An atom can use different combinations of atomic orbi tals to maximize the overlap of orbitals used by bonded atom s.
Figure shows an electron-pair bond formed by the ove rlap of two ns atomic orbitals, two np atomic orbitals, and an ns and
an np orbital where n = 2. Notice that bonding overlap occurs when the int eracting atomic orbitals have the correct orientati on (are
"pointing at" each other) and are in phase (represented by colors in Figure).
Maximum overlap occurs between orbitals with the same sp atial orientation and similar energies.
Figure: Three Different Ways to Form an Electron-Pair Bond. An electron-pair bond can be formed by the overlap of any of
the following combinations of two singly occupied ato mic orbitals: two ns atomic orbitals (a), an ns and an np atomic orbital (b),
and two np atomic orbitals (c) where n = 2. The positi ve lobe is indicated in yellow, and the negative lob e is in blue.
Let’s examine the bonds in BeH, for example. Accordin g to the VSEPR model, BeH is a linear compound with fou r valence
electrons and two Be–H bonds. Its bonding can also be d escribed using an atomic orbital approach. Berylliu m has a 1 s2s electron
configuration, and each H atom has a 1 s electron configuration. Because the Be atom has a fi lled 2 s subshell, however, it has no
singly occupied orbitals available to overlap with th e singly occupied 1 s orbitals on the H atoms. If a singly occupied 1 s orbital on
hydrogen were to overlap with a filled 2 s orbital on beryllium, the resulting bonding orbita l would contain three electrons, but the2. 2
2 2
2 2

6.2.1.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170042maximum allowed by quantum mechanics is two. How then is beryllium able to bond to two hydrogen a toms? One way would be
to add enough energy to excite one of its 2 s electrons into an empty 2 p orbital and reverse its spin, in a process called promo tion:
In this excited state, the Be atom would have two singly occupied atomic orbitals (the 2 s and one of the 2 p orbitals), each of which
could overlap with a singly occupied 1 s orbital of an H atom to form an electron-pair bond. Although this would produce, the
two Be–H bonds would not be equivalent: the 1 s orbital of one hydrogen atom would overlap with a Be 2s orbital, and the 1 s
orbital of the other hydrogen atom would overlap with an orbital of a different energy, a Be 2 p orbital. Experimental evidence
indicates, however, that the two Be–H bonds have identi cal energies. To resolve this discrepancy and explain how molecules such
as form, scientists developed the concept of hybridiz ation.
Contributors and Attributions
Organic Chemistry With a Biological Emphasis by Tim Soderberg (University of Minnesota, Morris)
6.2.1: Localized Electron Model of Covalent Bonding is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
LibreTexts.

6.2.2.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1700436.2.2: Hybrid Atomic Orbitals
The localized valence bond theory uses a process called hybridization, in which atomic orbitals that are similar in energ y but not
equivalent are combined mathematically to produce s ets of equivalent orbitals that are properly oriente d to form bonds. These new
combinations are called hybrid atomic orbitals beca use they are produced by combining (hybridizing) two or more atomic orbitals
from the same atom.
Hybridization of s and p Orbitals
In BeH, we can generate two equivalent orbitals by co mbining the 2 s orbital of beryllium and any one of the three dege nerate 2 p
orbitals. By taking the sum and the difference of Be 2s and 2 p atomic orbitals, for example, we produce two new orbitals with
major and minor lobes oriented along the z-axes, as shown in Figure.
Figure: The position of the atomic nucleus with respect to an sp hybrid orbital. The nucleus is actually located slightl y
inside the minor lobe, not at the node separating the m ajor and minor lobes.
Because the difference A − B can also be written as A + (−B), in Figure and subsequent figures we have reve rsed the
phase(s) of the orbital being subtracted, which is th e same as multiplying it by −1 and adding. This give s us Equation, where
the value is needed mathematically to indicate that the 2 s and 2 p orbitals contribute equally to each hybrid orbital.
and
Figure: The Formation of sp Hybrid Orbitals. Taking the sum and difference of an ns and an np atomic orbital where n = 2
gives two equivalent sp hybrid orbitals oriented at 180° to each other.
The nucleus resides just inside the minor lobe of eac h orbital. In this case, the new orbitals are called sp hybrids because they are
formed from one s and one p orbital. The two new orbitals are equivalent in energ y, and their energy is between the energy values
associated with pure s and p orbitals, as illustrated in this diagram:
z

6.2.2.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170043Each singly occupied sp hybrid orbital can now form an electron-pair bond wi th the singly occupied 1 s atomic orbital of one of the
H atoms. As shown in Figure. each sp orbital on Be has the correct orientation for the major lobes to overlap with the 1 s
atomic orbital of an H atom. The formation of two ene rgetically equivalent Be–H bonds produces a linear m olecule. Thus
valence bond theory does what neither the Lewis elect ron structure nor the VSEPR model is able to do; it ex plains why the bonds
in are equivalent in energy and why has a linear geom etry.
Figure: Explanation of the Bonding in BeH Using sp Hybrid Orbitals. Each singly occupied sp hybrid orbital on beryllium
can form an electron-pair bond with the singly occup ied 1 s orbital of a hydrogen atom. Because the two sp hybrid orbitals are
oriented at a 180° angle, the BeH molecule is linear.
Because both promotion and hybridization require an input of energy, the formation of a set of singly oc cupied hybrid atomic
orbitals is energetically uphill. The overall proce ss of forming a compound with hybrid orbitals will be energetically favorable only
if the amount of energy released by the formation o f covalent bonds is greater than the amount of ener gy used to form the hybrid
orbitals (Figure). As we will see, some compounds are hig hly unstable or do not exist because the amount of e nergy required
to form hybrid orbitals is greater than the amount of energ y that would be released by the formation of additional b onds.
Figure: A Hypothetical Stepwise Process for the Formation of BeH from a Gaseous Be Atom and Two Gaseous H Atoms.
The promotion of an electron from the 2 s orbital of beryllium to one of the 2 p orbitals is energetically uphill. The overall process of
forming a BeH molecule from a Be atom and two H ato ms will therefore be energetically favorable only if the amount of energy
released by the formation of the two Be–H bonds is gre ater than the amount of energy required for promoti on and hybridization.
The concept of hybridization also explains why boron, with a 2 s2p valence electron configuration, forms three bonds wi th
fluorine to produce BF, as predicted by the Lewis and VSEPR approaches. With only a single unpaired electron in its ground state,
boron should form only a single covalent bond. By th e promotion of one of its 2 s electrons to an unoccupied 2 p orbital, however,
followed by the hybridization of the three singly occ upied orbitals (the 2 s and two 2 p orbitals), boron acquires a set of three
equivalent hybrid orbitals with one electron each, as shown h ere:2
2 1

6.2.2.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170043
The hybrid orbitals are degenerate and are oriented at 120° angles to each other (Figure). Because the hy brid atomic orbitals
are formed from one s and two p orbitals, boron is said to be sp hybridized (pronounced “s-p-two” or “s-p-squared”). The singly
occupied sp hybrid atomic orbitals can overlap with the singly o ccupied orbitals on each of the three F atoms to form a trigonal
planar structure with three energetically equivalent B–F bonds.
Figure: Formation of sp Hybrid Orbitals. Combining one ns and two np atomic orbitals gives three equivalent sp hybrid
orbitals in a trigonal planar arrangement; that is, o riented at 120° to one another.
Looking at the 2 s2p valence electron configuration of carbon, we might expect carbon to use its two unpaired 2 p electrons to
form compounds with only two covalent bonds. We know, ho wever, that carbon typically forms compounds with four covalent
bonds. We can explain this apparent discrepancy by the hybridization of the 2 s orbital and the three 2 p orbitals on carbon to give a
set of four degenerate sp (“s-p-three” or “s-p-cubed”) hybrid orbitals, each with a single electron:
The large lobes of the hybridized orbitals are orien ted toward the vertices of a tetrahedron, with 109.5° an gles between them
(Figure). Like all the hybridized orbitals discussed earlier, the sp hybrid atomic orbitals are predicted to be equal in energy.
Thus, methane (CH) is a tetrahedral molecule with four e quivalent C-H bonds.
Figure: Formation of sp Hybrid Orbitals. Combining one ns and three np atomic orbitals results in four sp hybrid orbitals
oriented at 109.5° to one another in a tetrahedral arrangement.
In addition to explaining why some elements form more bonds than would be expected based on their valence electron
configurations, and why the bonds formed are equal in e nergy, valence bond theory explains why these compound s are so stable:
the amount of energy released increases with the num ber of bonds formed. In the case of carbon, for examp le, much more energy is
released in the formation of four bonds than two, so compounds of carbon with four bonds tend to be more stable than those with
only two. Carbon does form compounds with only two cova lent bonds (such as CH or CF), but these species are hi ghly reactive,
unstable intermediates that only form in certain chemic al reactions.
Valence bond theory explains the number of bonds formed in a compound and the relative
bond strengths.2
2 2
2 2
3 3
2 2

6.2.2.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170043The bonding in molecules such as NH or H O, which have l one pairs on the central atom, can also be described in terms of hybrid
atomic orbitals. In NH, for example, N, with a 2 s2p valence electron configuration, can hybridize its 2 s and 2 p orbitals to
produce four sp hybrid orbitals. Placing five valence electrons in th e four hybrid orbitals, we obtain three that are singl y occupied
and one with a pair of electrons:
The three singly occupied sp lobes can form bonds with three H atoms, while the four th orbital accommodates the lone pair of
electrons. Similarly, H O has an sp hybridized oxygen atom that uses two singly occupie d sp lobes to bond to two H atoms, and
two to accommodate the two lone pairs predicted by th e VSEPR model. Such descriptions explain the approximatel y tetrahedral
distribution of electron pairs on the central atom in NH and H O. Unfortunately, however, recent experiment al evidence indicates
that in NH and H O, the hybridized orbitals are not entirely equivalent in energy, making this bonding model an active area of
research.
Use the VSEPR model to predict the number of electron pa irs and molecular geometry in each compound and the n describe the
hybridization and bonding of all atoms except hydrogen.
a. H S
b. CHCl
Given: two chemical compounds
Asked for: number of electron pairs and molecular geometry, hybridiz ation, and bonding
Strategy:
A. Using the VSEPR approach to determine the number of electro n pairs and the molecular geometry of the molecule.
B. From the valence electron configuration of the centra l atom, predict the number and type of hybrid orbitals tha t can be
produced. Fill these hybrid orbitals with the total number of valence electrons around the central atom and descri be the
hybridization.
Solution:
1. A H S has four electron pairs around the sulfur atom with two bonded atoms, so the VSEPR model predicts a molecular
geometry that is bent, or V shaped. B Sulfur has a 3 s3p valence electron configuration with six electrons, but b y
hybridizing its 3 s and 3 p orbitals, it can produce four sp hybrids. If the six valence electrons are placed in these orbitals,
two have electron pairs and two are singly occupied. The two sp hybrid orbitals that are singly occupied are used to form
S–H bonds, whereas the other two have lone pairs of electrons. Together, the four sp hybrid orbitals produce an
approximately tetrahedral arrangement of electron pair s, which agrees with the molecular geometry predicted by the
VSEPR model.
2. A The CHCl molecule has four valence electrons around t he central atom. In the VSEPR model, the carbon atom has fou r
electron pairs, and the molecular geometry is tetrahedra l. B Carbon has a 2 s2p valence electron configuration. By
hybridizing its 2 s and 2 p orbitals, it can form four sp hybridized orbitals that are equal in energy. Eight el ectrons around
the central atom (four from C, one from H, and one from each of the three Cl atoms) fill three sp hybrid orbitals to form
C–Cl bonds, and one forms a C–H bond. Similarly, the Cl atoms, wit h seven electrons each in their 3 s and 3 p valence
subshells, can be viewed as sp hybridized. Each Cl atom uses a singly occupied sp hybrid orbital to form a C–Cl bond and
three hybrid orbitals to accommodate lone pairs.
Use the VSEPR model to predict the number of electron pa irs and molecular geometry in each compound and the n describe the
hybridization and bonding of all atoms except hydrogen.
a. the BF ion
b. hydrazine (H N–NH)3 2
32 3
23 3
3 2
3 2
Example
2 4
2 2
3 3
Exercise
4−
2 2

6.2.2.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170043Answer a
B is sp hybridized; F is also sp hybridized so it can accommodate one B–F bond and t hree lone pairs. The molecular
geometry is tetrahedral.
Answer b
Each N atom is sp hybridized and uses one sp hybrid orbital to form the N–N bond, two to form N–H bond s, and one to
accommodate a lone pair. The molecular geometry about e ach N is trigonal pyramidal.
The number of hybrid orbitals used by the central atom i s the same as the number of electron pairs around the central atom.
Hybridization Using d Orbitals
Hybridization is not restricted to the ns and np atomic orbitals. The bonding in compounds with centr al atoms in the period 3 and
below can also be described using hybrid atomic orbit als. In these cases, the central atom can use its va lence (n − 1) d orbitals as
well as its ns and np orbitals to form hybrid atomic orbitals, which allo ws it to accommodate five or more bonded atoms (as in PF
and SF). Using the ns orbital, all three np orbitals, and one (n − 1) d orbital gives a set of five sp d hybrid orbitals that point toward
the vertices of a trigonal bipyramid (part (a) in Fi gure). In this case, the five hybrid orbitals are not all equivalent: three form
a triangular array oriented at 120° angles, and the oth er two are oriented at 90° to the first three and at 180° to each other.
Similarly, the combination of the ns orbital, all three np orbitals, and two nd orbitals gives a set of six equivalent sp d hybrid
orbitals oriented toward the vertices of an octahedr on (part (b) in Figure 9.5.6). In the VSEPR model, PF and SF are predicted to
be trigonal bipyramidal and octahedral, respectivel y, which agrees with a valence bond description in which sp d or sp d hybrid
orbitals are used for bonding.
Figure: Hybrid Orbitals Involving d Orbitals. The formation of a set of (a) five sp d hybrid orbitals and (b) six sp d hybrid
orbitals from ns, np, and nd atomic orbitals where n = 4.3 3
3 3
3 2
5 6
3 3 2
3 3 2

6.2.2.6 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170043What is the hybridization of the central atom in each spe cies? Describe the bonding in each species.
a. XeF
b. SO
c. SF
Given: three chemical species
Asked for: hybridization of the central atom
Strategy:
A. Determine the geometry of the molecule using the strat egy in Example. From the valence electron configuration of
the central atom and the number of electron pairs, determ ine the hybridization.
B. Place the total number of electrons around the centra l atom in the hybrid orbitals and describe the bonding.
Solution:
a. A Using the VSEPR model, we find that Xe in XeF forms four bonds an d has two lone pairs, so its structure is square
planar and it has six electron pairs. The six electron pa irs form an octahedral arrangement, so the Xe must be sp d
hybridized. B With 12 electrons around Xe, four of the six sp d hybrid orbitals form Xe–F bonds, and two are occupied by
lone pairs of electrons.
b. A The S in the SO ion has four electron pairs and has four bonde d atoms, so the structure is tetrahedral. The sulfur mu st
be sp hybridized to generate four S–O bonds. B Filling the sp hybrid orbitals with eight electrons from four bonds
produces four filled sp hybrid orbitals.
c. A The S atom in SF contains five electron pairs and four b onded atoms. The molecule has a seesaw structure with one lone
pair:
To accommodate five electron pairs, the sulfur atom must be sp d hybridized. B Filling these orbitals with 10 electrons
gives four sp d hybrid orbitals forming S–F bonds and one with a lone pair of electrons.
What is the hybridization of the central atom in each spe cies? Describe the bonding.
a. PCl
b. BrF
c. SiF
Answer a
sp with four P–Cl bonds
Answer a
sp d with three Br–F bonds and two lone pairs
Answer a
sp d with six Si–F bonds
Hybridization using d orbitals allows chemists to explain the structures and p roperties of many molecules and ions. Like most such
models, however, it is not universally accepted. Noneth eless, it does explain a fundamental difference betwe en the chemistry of theExample
42−
3 2
3 2
42−
3 3
Exercise
4+
62−
3 2

6.2.2.7 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170043elements in the period 2 (C, N, and O) and those in period 3 and below (such as Si, P, and S).
Period 2 elements do not form compounds in which the central atom is covalently bonded to five or more a toms, although such
compounds are common for the heavier elements. Thus wh ereas carbon and silicon both form tetrafluorides (CF and SiF), only
SiF reacts with F to give a stable hexafluoro dianion, SiF. Because there are no 2 d atomic orbitals, the formation of octahedral
CF would require hybrid orbitals created from 2 s, 2p, and 3 d atomic orbitals. The 3 d orbitals of carbon are so high in energy that
the amount of energy needed to form a set of sp d hybrid orbitals cannot be equaled by the energy re leased in the formation of two
additional C–F bonds. These additional bonds are expe cted to be weak because the carbon atom (and other at oms in period 2) is so
small that it cannot accommodate five or six F atoms at normal C–F bond lengths due to repulsions between electrons on adjacent
fluorine atoms. Perhaps not surprisingly, then, species such as CF have never been prepared.
What is the hybridization of the oxygen atom in OF? Is OF l ikely to exist?
Given: chemical compound
Asked for: hybridization and stability
Strategy:
A. Predict the geometry of OF using the VSEPR model.
B. From the number of electron pairs around O in OF, predict t he hybridization of O. Compare the number of hybrid orbi tals
with the number of electron pairs to decide whether the mole cule is likely to exist.
Solution:
A The VSEPR model predicts that OF will have five electro n pairs, resulting in a trigonal bipyramidal geometry with four
bonding pairs and one lone pair. B To accommodate five electron pairs, the O atom would have to be sp d hybridized. The only
d orbital available for forming a set of sp d hybrid orbitals is a 3 d orbital, which is much higher in energy than the 2 s and 2 p
valence orbitals of oxygen. As a result, the OF molecule i s unlikely to exist. In fact, it has not been detected.
What is the hybridization of the boron atom in? Is this i on likely to exist?
Answer a
sp d hybridization; no
Summary
Hybridization increases the overlap of bonding orbit als and explains the molecular geometries of many sp ecies whose geometry
cannot be explained using a VSEPR approach. The localized bonding model (called valence bond theory) assumes that covalent
bonds are formed when atomic orbitals overlap and th at the strength of a covalent bond is proportional t o the amount of overlap. It
also assumes that atoms use combinations of atomic or bitals (hybrids) to maximize the overlap with adjacent atoms. The f ormation
of hybrid atomic orbitals can be viewed as occurring via promotion of an electron from a filled ns subshell to an empty np or (n
− 1)d valence orbital, followed by hybridization, the combination of the orbitals to give a new set o f (usually) equivalent orbitals
that are oriented properly to form bonds. The combi nation of an ns and an np orbital gives rise to two equivalent sp hybrids
oriented at 180°, whereas the combination of an ns and two or three np orbitals produces three equivalent sp hybrids or four
equivalent sp hybrids, respectively. The bonding in molecules with more th an an octet of electrons around a central atom can be
explained by invoking the participation of one or t wo (n − 1) d orbitals to give sets of five sp d or six sp d hybrid orbitals, capable
of forming five or six bonds, respectively. The spati al orientation of the hybrid atomic orbitals is cons istent with the geometries
predicted using the VSEPR model.
6.2.2: Hybrid Atomic Orbitals is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.4 4
4−
62−
62−
3 2
62−
Example:
4 4
Exercise
3 2
3 3 2

6.2.3.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1700446.2.3: Orbital Overlap in Multiple Bonds
To explain double and triple bonds in terms of orbital overla p
So far in our valence bond orbital descriptions we ha ve not dealt with polyatomic systems with multiple bon ds. To do so, we can
use an approach in which we describe bonding using l ocalized electron-pair bonds formed by hybrid atomi c orbitals, and
bonding using unhybridized np atomic orbitals.
Multiple Bonding
We begin our discussion by considering the bonding i n ethylene (C H). Experimentally, we know that the H–C–H and H–C–C
angles in ethylene are approximately 120°. This angl e suggests that the carbon atoms are sp hybridized, which means that a singly
occupied sp orbital on one carbon overlaps with a singly occupi ed s orbital on each H and a singly occupied sp lobe on the other
C. The sp hybridization can be represented as follows:
With this hybridization, each carbon forms a trigona l planar set of three bonds: two C–H (sp + s) and one C–C (sp + sp) (part
(a) in Figure). After hybridization, however, each car bon still has one unhybridized 2 p orbital that is perpendicular to the
hybridized lobes and contains a single electron (par t (b) in Figure). These two singly occupied 2 p orbitals can overlap in a
side-to-side fashion to form a bond. The orbitals ove rlap both above and below the plane of the molecule but form just one
bonding orbital space. The C–C bond plus the hybridized C–C bond together form a double bond.
Figure: Bonding in Ethylene. (a) The -bonded framewo rk is formed by the overlap of two sets of singly occup ied carbon
sp hybrid orbitals and four singly occupied hydrogen 1 s orbitals to form electron-pair bonds. This uses 10 of t he 12 valence
electrons to form a total of five bonds (four C–H bo nds and one C–C bond). (b) One singly occupied unhybr idized 2 p orbital
remains on each carbon atom to form a carbon–carbon bond. (Note: by convention, in planar molecules the axis perpendicular to
the molecular plane is the z-axis.)
Triple bonds, as in acetylene (C H), can also be exp lained using a combination of hybrid atomic orbital s and unhybridized np
orbitals. The four atoms of acetylene are collinear, which suggests that each carbon is sp hybridized. If one sp lobe on each carbon
atom is used to form a C–C bond and one is used to form the C–H bond, then each carbon will still have t wo unhybridized 2 p
orbitals (a 2 p pair), each with one electron (part (a) in Figure).
The two 2 p orbitals on each carbon can align with the correspon ding 2 p orbitals on the adjacent carbon to simultaneously fo rm a
pair of bonds (part (b) in Figure). Because each of th e unhybridized 2 p orbitals has a single electron, four electrons areLearning Objectives
2 4
2 2
2 2 2
z
z
z
2 2
x,y

6.2.3.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170044available for bonding, which is enough to occupy on ly the bonding molecular orbitals. Acetylene must th erefore have a carbon–
carbon triple bond, which consists of a C–C bond an d two mutually perpendicular bonds. Acetylene does in f act have a shorter
carbon–carbon bond (120.3 pm) and a higher bond ener gy (965 kJ/mol) than ethane and ethylene, as we would e xpect for a triple
bond.
Figure: Bonding in Acetylene (a) In the formation of the -bonded framework, two sets of singly occupied ca rbon sp hybrid
orbitals and two singly occupied hydrogen 1 s orbitals overlap. (b) In the formation of two carbo n–carbon bonds in acetylene, two
singly occupied unhybridized 2 p orbitals on each carbon atom overlap. With one bon d plus two bonds, the carbon–carbon
bond order in acetylene is 3.
Describe the bonding in HCN using a combination of hyb rid atomic orbitals and unhybridized p orbitals. The HCN molecule is
linear.
Given: chemical compound and molecular geometry
Asked for: bonding description using hybrid atomic orbitals and p or bitals
Strategy:
A. From the geometry given, predict the hybridization in HCN. Us e the hybrid orbitals to form the -bonded framework.
B. Use any remaining unhybridized p orbitals to form bonds.
Solution:
-bonding framework: an unhybridized s orbital on hydro gen overlaps with an sp hybrid orbital on carbon, sp hybrid
orbital on carbon overlaps with an sp hybrid orbital on nitrogen
bonding: unhybridized p atomic orbitals on carbon and nitrogen overlap to form a bond.

Describe the bonding in formaldehyde (H C=O), a trigona l planar molecule, using a combination of hybrid atom ic orbitals and
molecular orbitals.
Answer
-bonding framework: Carbon and oxygen are sp hybridized. Two sp hybrid orbitals on oxygen have lone pairs, two
sp hybrid orbitals on carbon form C–H bonds, and one sp hybrid orbital on C and O forms a C–O bond.
bonding: Unhybridized, singly occupied 2 p atomic orbitals on carbon and oxygen overlap to form a b ond.
Orbital Overlap and Resonance Structures
Resonance structures can be used to describe the bo nding in molecules such as ozone (O) and the nitrite ion (NO). Ozone can be
represented by either of these Lewis electron structures:
Although the VSEPR model correctly predicts that both species ar e bent, it gives no information about their bond orders.x,y
Example
Exercise
2 2
2 2
3 2−

6.2.3.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170044Experimental evidence indicates that ozone has a bon d angle of 117.5°. Because this angle is close to 120°, it is likely that the
central oxygen atom in ozone is trigonal planar and sp hybridized. If we assume that the terminal oxygen at oms are also sp
hybridized, then we obtain the -bonded framework shown i n Figure. Two of the three sp lobes on the central O are used to
form O–O sigma bonds, and the third has a lone pair of e lectrons. Each terminal oxygen atom has two lone pair s of electrons that
are also in sp lobes. In addition, each oxygen atom has one unhybrid ized 2 p orbital perpendicular to the molecular plane. The
bonds and lone pairs account for a total of 14 elec trons (five lone pairs and two bonds, each containing 2 electrons). Each oxygen
atom in ozone has 6 valence electrons, so O has a tota l of 18 valence electrons. Subtracting 14 electrons f rom the total gives us 4
electrons that must occupy the three unhybridized 2 p orbitals.
Figure: Bonding in Ozone. (a) In the formation of t he -bonded framework, three sets of oxygen sp hybrid orbitals overlap
to give two O–O bonds and five lone pairs, two on ea ch terminal O and one on the central O. The bonds a nd lone pairs account
for 14 of the 18 valence electrons of O. (b) One unh ybridized 2 p orbital remains on each oxygen atom that is availabl e for
bonding. The unhybridized 2 p orbital on each terminal O atom has a single electro n, whereas the unhybridized 2 p orbital on the
central O atom has 2 electrons.

Describe the bonding in the nitrite ion in terms of a combination of hybrid atomic orbitals and unhybridi zed p orbitals. Lewis
dot structures and the VSEPR model predict that the NO ion is bent.
Given: chemical species and molecular geometry
Strategy:
A. From the structure, predict the type of atomic orbital hybri dization in the ion the central atom.
B. Use hybrid orbitals to form the -bonding framework.
C. Use hybrid orbitals to form the bonding.
Solution:
A The lone pair of electrons on nitrogen and a bent structure suggest that the bonding in NO is similar to the bonding in
ozone. The bent structure implies that the nitrogen is sp hybridized.
B If we assume that the oxygen atoms are sp hybridized as well, then we can use two sp hybrid orbitals on each oxygen and
one sp hybrid orbital on nitrogen to accommodate the five lone pairs of electrons. Two sp hybrid orbitals on nitrogen form
bonds with the remaining sp hybrid orbital on each oxygen. The bonds and lone pairs account for 14 electrons. We are left
with three unhybridized 2 p orbitals, one on each atom, perpendicular to the pl ane of the molecule, and 4 electrons. Just as with
ozone, these three 2 p orbitals can overlap to form pi bonds.
2 2
3 z
z z
Example
2−
2−
2 2
2 2

6.2.3.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170044
Describe the bonding in the formate ion (HCO), in terms of a combination of hybrid atomic orbitals and molecu lar orbitals.
Answer
Like nitrite, formate is a planar polyatomic ion with 18 valence electrons. The bonding framework can be described in
terms of sp hybridized carbon and oxygen, which account for 14 electrons. The three unhybridized 2 p orbitals (on C and
both O atoms) overlap to form bonds. The overall C–O bon d order is therefore
Summary
Polyatomic systems with multiple bonds can be describe d using hybrid atomic orbitals for bonding and unhyb ridized p orbitals to
describe bonding.
6.2.3: Orbital Overlap in Multiple Bonds is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.Exercise
2−

6.2.4.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/3551946.2.4: Molecular Orbital Theory
To use molecular orbital theory to predict bond order
To apply Molecular Orbital Theory to the diatomic homonucl ear molecule from the elements in the second period.
None of the approaches we have described so far can ad equately explain why some compounds are colored and o thers are not, why
some substances with unpaired electrons are stable, a nd why others are effective semiconductors. These app roaches also cannot
describe the nature of resonance. Such limitations le d to the development of a new approach to bonding in which electrons are not
viewed as being localized between the nuclei of bonde d atoms but are instead delocalized throughout the e ntire molecule. Just as
with the valence bond theory, the approach we are about to discuss is based on a quantum mechanical model.
Previously, we described the electrons in isolated ato ms as having certain spatial distributions, called orbitals, each with a
particular orbital energy. Just as the positions and energies of electrons in atoms can be described in terms of atomic orbitals
(AOs), the positions and energies of electrons in molecules can be described in terms of molecular orbitals (MOs) A particular
spatial distribution of electrons in a molecule tha t is associated with a particular orbital energy.—a spa tial distribution of electrons
in a molecule that is associated with a particular orbital energy. As the name suggests, molecular orbitals are not localized on a
single atom but extend over the entire molecule. Con sequently, the molecular orbital approach, called mol ecular orbital theory is a
delocalized approach to bonding.
Although the molecular orbital theory is computation ally demanding, the principles on which it is based are similar to those we
used to determine electron configurations for atoms. The key difference is that in molecular orbitals, th e electrons are allowed to
interact with more than one atomic nucleus at a time. Just as with atomic orbitals, we create an energy-lev el diagram by listing the
molecular orbitals in order of increasing energy. We then fill the orbitals with the required number of valence electrons according to
the Pauli principle. This means that each molecular orb ital can accommodate a maximum of two electrons with opp osite spins.
6.2.4.1: Molecular Orbitals Involving Only ns Atomic Orbitals
We begin our discussion of molecular orbitals with the simplest molecule, H, formed from two isolated hydrog en atoms, each with
a 1s electron configuration. As discussed previously, electrons can behave like waves. In the molecular or bital approach, the
overlapping atomic orbitals are described by mathemat ical equations called wave functions. The 1 s atomic orbitals on the two
hydrogen atoms interact to form two new molecular orbi tals, one produced by taking the sum of the two H 1 s wave functions, and
the other produced by taking their difference:
The molecular orbitals created from Equation are c alled linear combinations of atomic orbitals (LCAOs) Molecular orbitals
created from the sum and the difference of two wave f unctions (atomic orbitals). A molecule must have as many molecular orbitals
as there are atomic orbitals.
Adding two atomic orbitals corresponds to constructive interference between two waves, thus reinforcing thei r intensity; the
internuclear electron probability density is increased. The molecular orbital corresponding to the sum of the two H 1 s orbitals is
called a σ combination (pronounced “sigma one ess”) (part (a) and part (b) in Figure). In a sigma (σ) or bital, A bonding
molecular orbital in which the electron density alon g the internuclear axis and between the nuclei has cy lindrical symmetry, the
electron density along the internuclear axis and bet ween the nuclei has cylindrical symmetry; that is, all cross-sections
perpendicular to the internuclear axis are circles. T he subscript 1 s denotes the atomic orbitals from which the molecular orbital was
derived: The ≈ sign is used rather than an = sign because we are ignoring certain constants that are not important to our argument.Learning Objectives
1s

6.2.4.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/355194
Figure: Molecular Orbitals for the H Molecule. (a) This diagram shows the formation of a bonding σ m olecular orbital for
H as the sum of the wave functions (Ψ) of two H 1s atom ic orbitals. (b) This plot of the square of the wave f unction (Ψ) for the
bonding σ molecular orbital illustrates the increased electron probability density between the two hydroge n nuclei. (Recall that
the probability density is proportional to the square of the wave function.) (c) This diagram shows the form ation of an antibonding
molecular orbital for H as the difference of the wa ve functions (Ψ) of two H 1s atomic orbitals. (d) This plot of the square of
the wave function (Ψ) for the antibonding molecula r orbital illustrates the node corresponding to zero e lectron probability
density between the two hydrogen nuclei.
Conversely, subtracting one atomic orbital from anot her corresponds to destructive interference between two waves, which reduces
their intensity and causes a decrease in the internuclear electron probability density (part (c) and part (d) in Figure). The
resulting pattern contains a node where the electron density is zero. The molecular or bital corresponding to the difference is called
(“sigma one ess star”). In a sigma star (σ*) orbita l An antibonding molecular orbital in which there is a region of zero electron
probability (a nodal plane) perpendicular to the in ternuclear axis., there is a region of zero electro n probability, a nodal plane,
perpendicular to the internuclear axis:
A molecule must have as many molecular orbitals as there are atomic orbitals.
The electron density in the σ molecular orbital is greatest between the two positively charged nuclei, a nd the resulting electron–
nucleus electrostatic attractions reduce repulsions b etween the nuclei. Thus the σ orbital represents a b onding molecular orbital. A
molecular orbital that forms when atomic orbitals or orbital lobes with the same sign interact to give i ncreased electron probability
between the nuclei due to constructive reinforcement of the wave functions. In contrast, electrons in th e orbital are generally
found in the space outside the internuclear region. Because this allows the positively charged nuclei to repel one another, the
orbital is an antibonding molecular orbital (a molec ular orbital that forms when atomic orbitals or orbita l lobes of opposite sign
interact to give decreased electron probability between t he nuclei due to destructive reinforcement of the wave fun ctions).
Antibonding orbitals contain a node perpendicular to the internuclear axis; bonding
orbitals do not.
6.2.4.2: Energy-Level Diagrams
Because electrons in the σ orbital interact simulta neously with both nuclei, they have a lower energy tha n electrons that interact
with only one nucleus. This means that the σ molecular orbital has a lower energy than either of the hydrogen 1 s atomic orbitals.2 1s
1s
1s
1s
1s
1s

6.2.4.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/355194Conversely, electrons in the orbital interact with only one hydrogen nucleus at a time. In addition, the y are farther away from
the nucleus than they were in the parent hydrogen 1 s atomic orbitals. Consequently, the molecular orbit al has a higher energy
than either of the hydrogen 1 s atomic orbitals. The σ (bonding) molecular orbital is stabilized relative to the 1 s atomic orbitals,
and the (antibonding) molecular orbital is destabilized. The relative energy levels of these orbitals are sh own in the energy-level
diagram (a schematic drawing that compares the energ ies of the molecular orbitals (bonding, antibonding, and nonbonding) with
the energies of the parent atomic orbitals) in Figure
Figure: Molecular Orbital Energy-Level Diagram for H The two available electrons (one from each H atom) in this
diagram fill the bonding σ molecular orbital. Becau se the energy of the σ molecular orbital is lower tha n that of the two H 1 s
atomic orbitals, the H molecule is more stable (at a l ower energy) than the two isolated H atoms.
A bonding molecular orbital is always lower in energy (more stable) than the com ponent
atomic orbitals, whereas an antibonding molecular orbital is always higher in ener gy
(less stable).
To describe the bonding in a homonuclear diatomic m olecule (a molecule that consists of two atoms of the same element) such as
H, we use molecular orbitals; that is, for a molecul e in which two identical atoms interact, we insert the t otal number of valence
electrons into the energy-level diagram (Figure). We fill the orbitals according to the Pauli principle and Hund’s rule: each
orbital can accommodate a maximum of two electrons wit h opposite spins, and the orbitals are filled in order of increasing energy.
Because each H atom contributes one valence electron, the resulting two electrons are exactly enough to f ill the σ bonding
molecular orbital. The two electrons enter an orbita l whose energy is lower than that of the parent atomi c orbitals, so the H
molecule is more stable than the two isolated hydroge n atoms. Thus molecular orbital theory correctly pre dicts that H is a stable
molecule. Because bonds form when electrons are concen trated in the space between nuclei, this approach is a lso consistent with
our earlier discussion of electron-pair bonds.
6.2.4.3: Bond Order in Molecular Orbital Theory
In the Lewis electron structures, the number of elec tron pairs holding two atoms together was called the bond order. In the
molecular orbital approach, bond order One-half the net number of bonding electrons in a molecule. is de fined as one-half the net
number of bonding electrons:
To calculate the bond order of H, we see from Figure that the σ (bonding) molecular orbital contains two electrons, while
the (antibonding) molecular orbital is empty. The bond order of H is therefore
This result corresponds to the single covalent bond pre dicted by Lewis dot symbols. Thus molecular orbital t heory and the Lewis
electron-pair approach agree that a single bond con taining two electrons has a bond order of 1. Double and triple bonds contain
four or six electrons, respectively, and correspond to bond orders of 2 and 3.
We can use energy-level diagrams such as the one in Figure to describe the bonding in other pairs of ato ms and ions where n
= 1, such as the H ion, the He ion, and the He molecul e. Again, we fill the lowest-energy molecular orbitals first while being1s
2.
1s 1s
1s
2 1s
2+2+2

6.2.4.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/355194sure not to violate the Pauli principle or Hund’s rule.
Figure: Molecular Orbital Energy-Level Diagrams for D iatomic Molecules with Only 1 s Atomic Orbitals. (a) The H ion,
(b) the He ion, and (c) the He molecule are shown he re.
Part (a) in Figure shows the energy-level diagram for the H ion, which contains two protons and only one el ectron. The
single electron occupies the σ bonding molecular or bital, giving a (σ) electron configuration. The numb er of electrons in an
orbital is indicated by a superscript. In this case, the bond order is (1-0)/2=1/2 Because the bond order i s greater than zero, the H
ion should be more stable than an isolated H atom and a proton. We can therefore use a molecular orbital e nergy-level diagram and
the calculated bond order to predict the relative s tability of species such as H. With a bond order of o nly 1/2 the bond in H
should be weaker than in the H molecule, and the H–H bo nd should be longer. As shown in Table, these predict ions agree
with the experimental data.
Part (b) in Figure is the molecular orbital energy-l evel diagram for He. This ion has a total of three va lence electrons.
Because the first two electrons completely fill the σ molecular orbital, the Pauli principle states that t he third electron must be in
the antibonding orbital, giving a electron configu ration. This electron configuration gives a bond orde r of (21)/2=1/2. As with H, the He ion should be stable, but the He–He bond should be weaker and longer than in H. In f act, the He
ion can be prepared, and its properties are consistent wit h our predictions (Table).
Table: Molecular Orbital Electron Configurations, B ond Orders, Bond Lengths, and Bond Energies for some Si mple Homonuclear
Diatomic Molecules and Ions
Molecule or Ion Electron Configuration Bond Order Bond Length (pm) Bond Energy (kJ/mol)
H (σ) 1/2 106 269
H (σ) 1 74 436
He 1/2 108 251
He 0 not observed not observed
Finally, we examine the He molecule, formed from two He at oms with 1 s electron configurations. Part (c) in Figure is the
molecular orbital energy-level diagram for He. With a total of four valence electrons, both the σ bondi ng and antibonding
orbitals must contain two electrons. This gives a ele ctron configuration, with a predicted bond order of (2 − 2) ÷ 2 = 0,
which indicates that the He molecule has no net bond a nd is not a stable species. Experiments show that the He molecule is
actually less stable than two isolated He atoms due to unfavorable el ectron–electron and nucleus–nucleus interactions.
In molecular orbital theory, electrons in antibonding orbitals effectively cance l the stabilization resulting from electrons in bondi ng
orbitals. Consequently, any system that has equal numbers of b onding and antibonding electrons will have a bond or der of 0, and it
is predicted to be unstable and therefore not to exi st in nature. In contrast to Lewis electron structures and the valence bond
approach, molecular orbital theory is able to accommodate systems with an odd number of electrons, such as the H ion.2+
2+2
2+
1s 1s1
2+
2+2+
2+
1s
2+2+2 2+
2+1s1
2 1 s2
2+
2 1s
2 2
2+

6.2.4.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/355194Molecular Orbital Theory: https://youtu.be/XgtOG0ezw78
In contrast to Lewis electron structures and the vale nce bond approach, molecular orbital theory can acc ommodate systems
with an odd number of electrons.
Use a molecular orbital energy-level diagram, such as t hose in Figure, to predict the bond order in the He i on. Is this
a stable species?
Given: chemical species
Asked for: molecular orbital energy-level diagram, bond order, an d stability
Strategy:
A. Combine the two He valence atomic orbitals to produce bondi ng and antibonding molecular orbitals. Draw the molecular
orbital energy-level diagram for the system.
B. Determine the total number of valence electrons in the He ion. Fill the molecular orbitals in the energy-le vel diagram
beginning with the orbital with the lowest energy. Be sure to obey the Pauli principle and Hund’s rule while doing so.
C. Calculate the bond order and predict whether the speci es is stable.
Solution:
A Two He 1 s atomic orbitals combine to give two molecular orbita ls: a σ bonding orbital at lower energy than the ato mic
orbitals and a antibonding orbital at higher energ y. The bonding in any diatomic molecule with two He ato ms can be
described using the following molecular orbital diagram:
B The He ion has only two valence electrons (two from ea ch He atom minus two for the +2 charge). We can also v iew
He as being formed from two He ions, each of which has a single valence electron in the 1 s atomic orbital. We can now fill
the molecular orbital diagram:
Molecular Orbital TheoryMolecular Orbital Theory
Example
22+
22+
1s
22+
22+ +

6.2.4.6 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/355194

The two electrons occupy the lowest-energy molecular o rbital, which is the bonding (σ) orbital, giving a (σ) electron
configuration. To avoid violating the Pauli principle, the electron spins must be paired. C So the bond order is
He is therefore predicted to contain a single He–He bond. T hus it should be a stable species.
Use a molecular orbital energy-level diagram to predi ct the valence-electron configuration and bond order of the H ion. Is
this a stable species?
Answer
H has a valence electron configuration of with a bond order of 0. It is therefore predicted to be unstable.
So far, our discussion of molecular orbitals has been co nfined to the interaction of valence orbitals, which t end to lie farthest from
the nucleus. When two atoms are close enough for their valence orbitals to overlap significantly, the fill ed inner electron shells are
largely unperturbed; hence they do not need to be c onsidered in a molecular orbital scheme. Also, when the inner orbitals are
completely filled, they contain exactly enough elec trons to completely fill both the bonding and antib onding molecular orbitals that
arise from their interaction. Thus the interaction of filled shells always gives a bond order of 0, so fille d shells are not a factor when
predicting the stability of a species. This means tha t we can focus our attention on the molecular orbital s derived from valence
atomic orbitals.
A molecular orbital diagram that can be applied to any homonuclear diatomic molecule with two identical alkali metal atoms (Li
and Cs, for example) is shown in part (a) in Figure, where M represents the metal atom. Only two energy level s are
important for describing the valence electron molecu lar orbitals of these species: a σ bonding molecular orbital and a σ
antibonding molecular orbital. Because each alkali metal (M) has an ns valence electron configuration, the M molecule has two
valence electrons that fill the σ bonding orbital. As a result, a bond order of 1 is predicted for all hom onuclear diatomic species
formed from the alkali metals (Li, Na, K, Rb, and Cs). The general features of these M diagrams are identi cal to the diagram
for the H molecule in Figure. Experimentally, all ar e found to be stable in the gas phase, and some are even stable in
solution.
Figure: Molecular Orbital Energy-Level Diagrams for Alkali Metal and Alkaline Earth Metal Diatomic (M) Molecules. (a)
For alkali metal diatomic molecules, the two valence electrons are enough to fill the σ (bonding) level, giving a bond order of 1.
(b) For alkaline earth metal diatomic molecules, the f our valence electrons fill both the σ (bonding) and t he σ * (nonbonding)
levels, leading to a predicted bond order of 0.1s 1s2
22+
Exercise
22−
22−
ns*ns
ns
2 2 2 2 2 2
ns
ns ns

6.2.4.7 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/355194Similarly, the molecular orbital diagrams for homonuc lear diatomic compounds of the alkaline earth metal s (such as Be), in which
each metal atom has an ns valence electron configuration, resemble the diagra m for the He molecule in part (c) in Figure
As shown in part (b) in Figure, this is indeed the case. All the homonuclear alkaline earth diatomic molecu les have four
valence electrons, which fill both the σ bonding orbi tal and the σ * antibonding orbital and give a bond order of 0. Thu s Be,
Mg, Ca, Sr, and Ba are all expected to be unstable, i n agreement with experimental data.In the solid state, however, all the
alkali metals and the alkaline earth metals exist as extended lattices held together by metallic bondin g. At low temperatures, is
stable.
Use a qualitative molecular orbital energy-level diag ram to predict the valence electron configuration, bond order, and likely
existence of the Na ion.
Given: chemical species
Asked for: molecular orbital energy-level diagram, valence electr on configuration, bond order, and stability
Strategy:
A. Combine the two sodium valence atomic orbitals to prod uce bonding and antibonding molecular orbitals. Draw the
molecular orbital energy-level diagram for this syste m.
B. Determine the total number of valence electrons in the Na ion. Fill the molecular orbitals in the energy- level diagram
beginning with the orbital with the lowest energy. Be sure to obey the Pauli principle and Hund’s rule while doing so.
C. Calculate the bond order and predict whether the speci es is stable.
Solution:
A Because sodium has a [Ne]3 s electron configuration, the molecular orbital ener gy-level diagram is qualitatively identical to
the diagram for the interaction of two 1 s atomic orbitals. B The Na ion has a total of three valence electrons (one from each
Na atom and one for the negative charge), resulting in a filled σ molecular orbital, a half-filled σ and a electron
configuration.
C The bond order is (2-1)÷2=1/2 With a fractional bond o rder, we predict that the Na ion exists but is highly reacti ve.
Use a qualitative molecular orbital energy-level diag ram to predict the valence electron configuration, bond order, and likely
existence of the Ca ion.
Answer
Ca has a electron configurations and a bond order of 1 /2 and should exist.
6.2.4.4: Molecular Orbitals Formed from ns and np Atomic Orbitals
Atomic orbitals other than ns orbitals can also interact to form molecular orbital s. Because individual p, d, and f orbitals are not
spherically symmetrical, however, we need to define a coordinate system so we know which lobes are interacti ng in threedimensional space. Recall that for each np subshell, for example, there are np, np, and np orbitals. All have the same energy and
are therefore degenerate, but they have different sp atial orientations.2
ns ns 2
2 2 2 2
Example
2−
2−
2−
3s 3s*
2−
Exercise
2+
2+
x y z

6.2.4.8 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/355194Just as with ns orbitals, we can form molecular orbitals from np orbitals by taking their mathematical sum and diff erence. When
two positive lobes with the appropriate spatial orienta tion overlap, as illustrated for two np atomic orbitals in part (a) in Figure
, it is the mathematical difference of their wave functions that results in constructive interference, which in turn increases the
electron probability density between the two atoms. T he difference therefore corresponds to a molecular o rbital called a
bonding molecular orbital because, just as with the σ orbitals discussed previo usly, it is symmetrical about the internuclear axis (in
this case, the z-axis):
The other possible combination of the two np orbitals is the mathematical sum:
In this combination, shown in part (b) in Figure, the positive lobe of one np atomic orbital overlaps the negative lobe of the
other, leading to destructive interference of the two waves and creating a node be tween the two atoms. Hence this is an antibonding
molecular orbital. Because it, too, is symmetrical ab out the internuclear axis, this molecular orbital i s called a
antibonding molecular orbital. Whenever orbitals combine, the bonding combination is always lower in energy (more
stable) than the atomic orbitals from which it was derived, and the antibonding combination is higher in energy (less stable).
Figure: Formation of Molecular Orbitals from np Atomic Orbitals on Adjacent Atoms.(a) By convention, in a linear
molecule or ion, the z-axis always corresponds to the internuclear axis, with +z to the right. As a result, the signs of the lobes of th e
np atomic orbitals on the two atoms alternate − + − +, from left to right. In this case, the σ (bonding) mol ecular orbital corresponds
to the mathematical difference, in which the overlap of lobes with the same sign resu lts in increased probability density between the
nuclei. (b) In contrast, the σ* (antibonding) molecu lar orbital corresponds to the mathematical sum, in which the overlap of lobes
with opposite signs results in a nodal plane of zero pro bability density perpendicular to the internuclear a xis.
Overlap of atomic orbital lobes with the same sign produces a bonding molecular orbital, regardless of whether it corresponds
to the sum or the difference of the atomic orbitals.
The remaining p orbitals on each of the two atoms, np and np, do not point directly toward each other. Instead, th ey are
perpendicular to the internuclear axis. If we arbitraril y label the axes as shown in Figure, we see that we have two pairs of np
orbitals: the two np orbitals lying in the plane of the page, and two np orbitals perpendicular to the plane. Although these two
pairs are equivalent in energy, the np orbital on one atom can interact with only the np orbital on the other, and the np orbital on
one atom can interact with only the np on the other. These interactions are side-to-side r ather than the head-to-head interactions
characteristic of σ orbitals. Each pair of overlapp ing atomic orbitals again forms two molecular orbital s: one corresponds to the
arithmetic sum of the two atomic orbitals and one to the difference. The sum of these side-to-side interact ions increases the electron
probability in the region above and below a line con necting the nuclei, so it is a bonding molecular orbi tal that is called a pi (π)
orbital (a bonding molecular orbital formed from th e side-to-side interactions of two or more parallel n p atomic orbitals). The
difference results in the overlap of orbital lobes wi th opposite signs, which produces a nodal plane perpe ndicular to the internuclear
axis; hence it is an antibonding molecular orbital, called a pi star (π*) orbital An antibonding molecula r orbital formed from the
difference of the side-to-side interactions of two or more parallel np atomic orbitals, creating a nodal plane perpendicu lar to the
internuclear axis..z
z
z
z
z
x y
x y
x x y
y

6.2.4.9 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/355194The two np orbitals can also combine using side-to-side interac tions to produce a bonding molecular orbital and a n
antibonding molecular orbital. Because the np and np atomic orbitals interact in the same way (side-to-si de) and have the
same energy, the and molecular orbitals are a degene rate pair, as are the and molecular orbitals.
Figure: Formation of π Molecular Orbitals from np and np Atomic Orbitals on Adjacent Atoms.(a) Because the sign s of the
lobes of both the np and the np atomic orbitals on adjacent atoms are the same, in bo th cases the mathematical sum corresponds to
a π (bonding) molecular orbital. (b) In contrast, in both cases, the mathematical difference corresponds to a π* (antibonding)
molecular orbital, with a nodal plane of zero proba bility density perpendicular to the internuclear axi s.
Figure is an energy-level diagram that can be appli ed to two identical interacting atoms that have three np atomic orbitals
each. There are six degenerate p atomic orbitals (three from each atom) that combin e to form six molecular orbitals, three bonding
and three antibonding. The bonding molecular orbital s are lower in energy than the atomic orbitals because of the increased
stability associated with the formation of a bond. Co nversely, the antibonding molecular orbitals are hi gher in energy, as shown.
The energy difference between the σ and σ* molecular orbitals is significantly greater than the differenc e between the two π and π*
sets. The reason for this is that the atomic orbital overlap and thus the strength of the interaction are greater for a σ bond than a π
bond, which means that the σ molecular orbital is more sta ble (lower in energy) than the π molecular orbitals.
Figure: The Relative Energies of the σ and π Molecula r Orbitals Derived from np, np, and np Orbitals on Identical
Adjacent Atoms. Because the two np orbitals point directly at each other, their orbita l overlap is greater, so the difference in energy
between the σ and σ* molecular orbitals is greater th an the energy difference between the π and π* orbit als.
Although many combinations of atomic orbitals form m olecular orbitals, we will discuss only one other inte raction: an ns atomic
orbital on one atom with an np atomic orbital on another. As shown in Figure, the sum of the two atomic wave functions (ns
+ np) produces a σ bonding molecular orbital. Their diff erence (ns − np) produces a σ* antibonding molecular orbital, which has a
nodal plane of zero probability density perpendicular t o the internuclear axis.y
x y
x y
x y
x y z
z
z
z z

6.2.4.10 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/355194
Figure: Formation of Molecular Orbitals from an ns Ato mic Orbital on One Atom and an np Atomic Orbital on an Adjacent
Atom.(a) The mathematical sum results in a σ (bonding) molecular orbital, with increased probability densit y between the nuclei.
(b) The mathematical difference results in a σ* (anti bonding) molecular orbital, with a nodal plane of z ero probability density
perpendicular to the internuclear axis.
6.2.4.5: Second Row Diatomic Molecules
If we combine the splitting schemes for the 2s and 2 p orbitals, we can predict bond order in all of the di atomic molecules and ions
composed of elements in the first complete row of the periodic table. Remember that only the valence orbi tals of the atoms need be
considered; as we saw in the cases of lithium hydride an d dilithium, the inner orbitals remain tightly bound and retain their
localized atomic character.
We now describe examples of systems involving period 2 homonuclear diatomic molecules, such as N, O, and F. When we draw
a molecular orbital diagram for a molecule, there are f our key points to remember:
1. The number of molecular orbitals produced is the sam e as the number of atomic orbitals used to create them (the law of
conservation of orbitals).
2. As the overlap between two atomic orbitals increases, the di fference in energy between the resulting bonding and ant ibonding
molecular orbitals increases.
3. When two atomic orbitals combine to form a pair of mole cular orbitals, the bonding molecular orbital is stabiliz ed about as
much as the antibonding molecular orbital is destabilized.
4. The interaction between atomic orbitals is greatest whe n they have the same energy.
The number of molecular orbitals is always equal to the total number of atomic orbitals we started wi th.
We illustrate how to use these points by constructing a molecular orbital energy-level diagram for F. We use the diagram in part
(a) in Figure; the n = 1 orbitals (σ and σ *) are located well below those of the n = 2 level and are not shown. As
illustrated in the diagram, the σ and σ * molecular orbitals are much lower in energy than th e molecular orbitals derived from the
2p atomic orbitals because of the large difference in energy between the 2 s and 2 p atomic orbitals of fluorine. The lowest-energy
molecular orbital derived from the three 2 p orbitals on each F is and the next most stable are the two degenerate orbitals,
and. For each bonding orbital in the diagram, there is an antibonding orbital, and the antibonding orbi tal is destabilized by
about as much as the corresponding bonding orbital is stabilized. As a result, the orbital is higher in energy than either of the
degenerate and orbitals. We can now fill the orbitals, beginning with the one that is lowest in energy.
Each fluorine has 7 valence electrons, so there are a total of 14 valence electrons in the F molecule. Sta rting at the lowest energy
level, the electrons are placed in the orbitals acco rding to the Pauli principle and Hund’s rule. Two elec trons each fill the σ and
σ* orbitals, 2 fill the orbital, 4 fill the two degene rate π orbitals, and 4 fill the two degenerate π orbi tals, for a total of 14
electrons. To determine what type of bonding the molec ular orbital approach predicts F to have, we must cal culate the bond order.
According to our diagram, there are 8 bonding electro ns and 6 antibonding electrons, giving a bond order o f (8 − 6) ÷ 2 = 1. Thus
F is predicted to have a stable F–F single bond, in agreeme nt with experimental data.z
2 2 2
1s 1s
2s 2s
2s
2s*

6.2.4.11 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/355194
Figure: Molecular Orbital Energy-Level Diagrams for H omonuclear Diatomic Molecules.(a) For F, with 14 vale nce
electrons (7 from each F atom), all of the energy lev els except the highest, are filled. This diagram shows 8 electrons in
bonding orbitals and 6 in antibonding orbitals, result ing in a bond order of 1. (b) For O, with 12 valenc e electrons (6 from each O
atom), there are only 2 electrons to place in the p air of orbitals. Hund’s rule dictates that one electro n occupies each
orbital, and their spins are parallel, giving the O m olecule two unpaired electrons. This diagram shows 8 el ectrons in bonding
orbitals and 4 in antibonding orbitals, resulting in a predicted bond order of 2.
We now turn to a molecular orbital description of the bonding in O. It so happens that the molecular orb ital description of this
molecule provided an explanation for a long-standin g puzzle that could not be explained using other bo nding models. To obtain the
molecular orbital energy-level diagram for O, we nee d to place 12 valence electrons (6 from each O atom) in the energy-level
diagram shown in part (b) in Figure. We again fill th e orbitals according to Hund’s rule and the Pauli pri nciple, beginning
with the orbital that is lowest in energy. Two electron s each are needed to fill the σ and σ * orbitals, 2 more to fill the orbital,
and 4 to fill the degenerate and orbitals. Accordi ng to Hund’s rule, the last 2 electrons must be placed in separate π
orbitals with their spins parallel, giving two unpaire d electrons. This leads to a predicted bond order of (8 − 4) ÷ 2 = 2, which
corresponds to a double bond, in agreement with experi mental data (Table 4.5): the O–O bond length is 120.7 pm, and the bond
energy is 498.4 kJ/mol at 298 K.
None of the other bonding models can predict the prese nce of two unpaired electrons in O. Chemists had long wondered why,
unlike most other substances, liquid O is attracted i nto a magnetic field. As shown in Figure, it actually remains suspended
between the poles of a magnet until the liquid boils away. The only way to explain this behavior was for O to have unpaired
electrons, making it paramagnetic, exactly as predict ed by molecular orbital theory. This result was one o f the earliest triumphs of
molecular orbital theory over the other bonding approache s we have discussed.
Figure: Liquid O Suspended between the Poles of a Magne t.Because the O molecule has two unpaired electrons, i t is
paramagnetic. Consequently, it is attracted into a ma gnetic field, which allows it to remain suspended betw een the poles of a
powerful magnet until it evaporates. Full video can b e found at https://www.youtube.com/watch?featur...&v=Lt4P6ctf06Q.2
2s 2s
Paramagnetism of Oxy genParamagnetism of Oxy gen
2 2

6.2.4.12 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/355194The magnetic properties of O are not just a laborat ory curiosity; they are absolutely crucial to the ex istence of life. Because Earth’s
atmosphere contains 20% oxygen, all organic compoun ds, including those that compose our body tissues, shoul d react rapidly with
air to form H O, CO, and N in an exothermic reaction. Fortunately for us, however, this reaction is very, ver y slow. The reason
for the unexpected stability of organic compounds i n an oxygen atmosphere is that virtually all organic compounds, as well as H O,
CO, and N, have only paired electrons, whereas oxyge n has two unpaired electrons. Thus the reaction of O with organic
compounds to give H O, CO, and N would require that at least one of the electrons on O change its spin durin g the reaction.
This would require a large input of energy, an obstac le that chemists call a spin barrier. Consequently, reactions of this type are
usually exceedingly slow. If they were not so slow, al l organic substances, including this book and you, would disappear in a puff
of smoke!
For period 2 diatomic molecules to the left of N in the periodic table, a slightly different molecular o rbital energy-level diagram is
needed because the molecular orbital is slightly higher in energy than the degenerate and orbitals. The difference in
energy between the 2 s and 2 p atomic orbitals increases from Li to F due to incr easing nuclear charge and poor screening of the 2 s
electrons by electrons in the 2 p subshell. The bonding interaction between the 2 s orbital on one atom and the 2 pz orbital on the
other is most important when the two orbitals have simi lar energies. This interaction decreases the energy of the σ orbital and
increases the energy of the orbital. Thus for Li, B e, B, C, and N, the orbital is higher in energy th an the orbitals, as
shown in Figure Experimentally, it is found that the energy gap between the ns and np atomic orbitals increases as the
nuclear charge increases (Figure). Thus for example, t he molecular orbital is at a lower energy than the pair.
Figure: Molecular Orbital Energy-Level Diagrams for t he Diatomic Molecules of the Period 2 Elements. Unlik e earlier
diagrams, only the molecular orbital energy levels fo r the molecules are shown here. For simplicity, the at omic orbital energy levels
for the component atoms have been omitted. For Li through N, the orbital is higher in energy than the orbitals. In
contrast, the orbital is lower in energy than the orbitals for O and F due to the increase in the energy difference between
the 2 s and 2 p atomic orbitals as the nuclear charge increases across t he row.
Completing the diagram for N in the same manner as demonstrated previously, we find that the 10 valence electrons result in 8
bonding electrons and 2 antibonding electrons, for a predicted bond order of 3, a triple bond. Experimen tal data show that the N–N
bond is significantly shorter than the F–F bond (109.8 pm in N versus 141.2 pm in F), and the bond energy is much greater for N
than for F (945.3 kJ/mol versus 158.8 kJ/mol, respectivel y). Thus the N bond is much shorter and stronger than the F bond,
consistent with what we would expect when comparing a triple b ond with a single bond.
Use a qualitative molecular orbital energy-level diag ram to predict the electron configuration, the bond order, and the number
of unpaired electrons in S, a bright blue gas at high temper atures.
Given: chemical species
Asked for: molecular orbital energy-level diagram, bond order, an d number of unpaired electrons2
2 2 2
2 2 2
2 2 2 2
2 2
2s
2 2 2 2 2
2 2
2 2
2 2 2
2 2 2
Example

6.2.4.13 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/355194Strategy:
A. Write the valence electron configuration of sulfur and determine the type of molecular orbitals formed in S. Predi ct the
relative energies of the molecular orbitals based on ho w close in energy the valence atomic orbitals are to one another.
B. Draw the molecular orbital energy-level diagram for t his system and determine the total number of valence ele ctrons in S.
C. Fill the molecular orbitals in order of increasing e nergy, being sure to obey the Pauli principle and Hund’s ru le.
D. Calculate the bond order and describe the bonding.
Solution:
A Sulfur has a [Ne]3 s3p valence electron configuration. To create a molecular orb ital energy-level diagram similar to those in
Figure and Figure, we need to know how close in energy the 3 s and 3 p atomic orbitals are because their energy
separation will determine whether the or the > molecu lar orbital is higher in energy. Because the ns–np energy gap
increases as the nuclear charge increases (Figure), the molec ular orbital will be lower in energy than the pair.
B The molecular orbital energy-level diagram is as follows:
Each sulfur atom contributes 6 valence electrons, for a total of 12 valence electrons.
C Ten valence electrons are used to fill the orbitals through and, leaving 2 electrons to occupy the d egenerate and
pair. From Hund’s rule, the remaining 2 electrons must o ccupy these orbitals separately with their spins alig ned. With the
numbers of electrons written as superscripts, the elec tron configuration of S is with 2
unpaired electrons. The bond order is (8 − 4) ÷ 2 = 2, so we predict an S=S double bond.
Use a qualitative molecular orbital energy-level diag ram to predict the electron configuration, the bond order, and the number
of unpaired electrons in the peroxide ion (O).
Answer
bond order of 1;
no unpaired electrons
6.2.4.6: Molecular Orbitals for Heteronuclear Diatomic Molecules
Diatomic molecules with two different atoms are called heteronuclear diatomic molecules. When two nonident ical atoms interact to
form a chemical bond, the interacting atomic orbital s do not have the same energy. If, for example, elem ent B is more
electronegative than element A (χ > χ), the net res ult is a “skewed” molecular orbital energy-level dia gram, such as the one
shown for a hypothetical A–B molecule in Figure. The atomic orbitals of element B are uniformly lower in energy than the
corresponding atomic orbitals of element A because of the enhanced stability of the electrons in element B. The molecular orbitals
are no longer symmetrical, and the energies of the bo nding molecular orbitals are more similar to those of the atomic orbitals of B.2
2 4
Exercise
22−
B A

6.2.4.14 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/355194Hence the electron density of bonding electrons is li kely to be closer to the more electronegative atom. I n this way, molecular
orbital theory can describe a polar covalent bond.
Figure: Molecular Orbital Energy-Level Diagram for a Heteronuclear Diatomic Molecule AB, Where χ > χ Th e bonding
molecular orbitals are closer in energy to the atomic orbitals of the more electronegative B atom. Consequ ently, the electrons in the
bonding orbitals are not shared equally between the t wo atoms. On average, they are closer to the B atom, resulting in a polar
covalent bond.
A molecular orbital energy-level diagram is always skewed toward the more
electronegative atom.
Nitric oxide (NO) is an example of a heteronuclear diat omic molecule. The reaction of O with N at high tempe ratures in
internal combustion engines forms nitric oxide, which undergoes a complex reaction with O to produce NO, whi ch in turn is
responsible for the brown color we associate with air p ollution. Recently, however, nitric oxide has also bee n recognized to be
a vital biological messenger involved in regulating bloo d pressure and long-term memory in mammals.
Because NO has an odd number of valence electrons (5 from nitrogen and 6 from oxygen, for a total of 11), i ts bonding and
properties cannot be successfully explained by eith er the Lewis electron-pair approach or valence bond theory. The molecular
orbital energy-level diagram for NO (Figure) shows that the general pattern is similar to that for the O m olecule
(Figure). Because 10 electrons are sufficient to fill all the bonding molecular orbitals derived from 2 p atomic orbitals,
the 11th electron must occupy one of the degenerate π orbitals. The predicted bond order for NO is therefo re (8-3) ÷ 2 = 2 1/2
. Experimental data, showing an N–O bond length of 115 p m and N–O bond energy of 631 kJ/mol, are consistent wit h this
description. These values lie between those of the N and O molecules, which have triple and double bonds, respectively. As
we stated earlier, molecular orbital theory can there fore explain the bonding in molecules with an odd num ber of electrons,
such as NO, whereas Lewis electron structures cannot.B A.
An Odd Number of Valence Electrons: NO
2 2
2 2
2 2

6.2.4.15 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/355194
Figure: Molecular Orbital Energy-Level Diagram for. Because has 11 valence electrons, it is paramagnetic,
with a single electron occupying the pair of orbita ls.
Note that electronic structure studies show the ground state configuration of to be in
order of increasing energy. Hence, the orbitals are lower in energy than the orbital. This is because the molecule
is near the transition of flipping energies levels o bserved in homonuclear diatomics where the sigma bond drops below the pi
bond (Figure).
Molecular orbital theory can also tell us something about the chemistry of. As indicated in the energy-level diagram in
Figure, NO has a single electron in a relatively high- energy molecular orbital. We might therefore expect it to have
similar reactivity as alkali metals such as Li and Na with their single valence electrons. In fact, is ea sily oxidized to the
cation, which is isoelectronic with and has a bond order of 3, corresponding to an N≡O triple bond.
Molecular Orbital Bonding for Second Row Elements: https://youtu.be/A_5Xa3sK_YE
6.2.4.7: Nonbonding Molecular Orbitals
Molecular orbital theory is also able to explain the presence of lone pairs of electrons. Consider, for example, the HCl molecule,
whose Lewis electron structure has three lone pairs of electrons on the chlorine atom. Using the molecular orbital approach to
describe the bonding in HCl, we can see from Figure tha t the 1 s orbital of atomic hydrogen is closest in energy to the 3 p
orbitals of chlorine. Consequently, the filled Cl 3 s atomic orbital is not involved in bonding to any a ppreciable extent, and the only
important interactions are those between the H 1 s and Cl 3 p orbitals. Of the three p orbitals, only one, designated as 3 p, can
Molecular Orbital Bonding for Second RMolecular Orbital Bonding for Second R
z

6.2.4.16 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/355194interact with the H 1 s orbital. The 3 p and 3 p atomic orbitals have no net overlap with the 1 s orbital on hydrogen, so they are not
involved in bonding. Because the energies of the Cl 3 s, 3p, and 3 p orbitals do not change when HCl forms, they are calle d
nonbonding molecular orbitals. A nonbonding molecular orbital occupied by a pair of electrons is the molecular orbital
equivalent of a lone pair of electrons. By definiti on, electrons in nonbonding orbitals have no effect o n bond order, so they are not
counted in the calculation of bond order. Thus the pr edicted bond order of HCl is (2 − 0) ÷ 2 = 1. Because the σ bonding molecular
orbital is closer in energy to the Cl 3 p than to the H 1 s atomic orbital, the electrons in the σ orbital are concentrated closer to the
chlorine atom than to hydrogen. A molecular orbital approach to bonding can therefore be used to descri be the polarization of the
H–Cl bond to give.
Figure: Molecular Orbital Energy-Level Diagram for HCl. The hydrogen 1 s atomic orbital interacts most strongly with the
3p orbital on chlorine, producing a bonding/antibondi ng pair of molecular orbitals. The other electrons on Cl are best viewed as
nonbonding. As a result, only the bonding σ orbital i s occupied by electrons, giving a bond order of 1.
Electrons in nonbonding molecular orbitals have no effect on bond order.
Use a “skewed” molecular orbital energy-level diagram like the one in Figure to describe the bonding in th e cyanide
ion (CN). What is the bond order?
Given: chemical species
Asked for: “skewed” molecular orbital energy-level diagram, bondin g description, and bond order
Strategy:
A. Calculate the total number of valence electrons in CN. T hen place these electrons in a molecular orbital energ y-level
diagram like Figure in order of increasing energy. Be s ure to obey the Pauli principle and Hund’s rule while doing
so.
B. Calculate the bond order and describe the bonding in C N.
Solution:
A The CN ion has a total of 10 valence electrons: 4 from C, 5 from N, and 1 for the −1 charge. Placing the se electrons in an
energy-level diagram like Figure fills the five lowest-en ergy orbitals, as shown here:x y
x y
z
z
Example

6.2.4.17 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/355194
Because χ > χ, the atomic orbitals of N (on the righ t) are lower in energy than those of C. B The resulting valence electron
configuration gives a predicted bond order of (8 − 2) ÷ 2 = 3, indicating that the CN ion has a triple bond, analogous to that in
N.
Use a qualitative molecular orbital energy-level diag ram to describe the bonding in the hypochlorite ion (OCl). What is the
bond order?
Answer: All molecular orbitals except the highest-energy σ* ar e filled, giving a bond order of 1.
Although the molecular orbital approach reveals a gr eat deal about the bonding in a given molecule, the procedure quickly becomes
computationally intensive for molecules of even moder ate complexity. Furthermore, because the computed mole cular orbitals
extend over the entire molecule, they are often dif ficult to represent in a way that is easy to visualize. Therefore we do not use a
pure molecular orbital approach to describe the bond ing in molecules or ions with more than two atoms. In stead, we use a valence
bond approach and a molecular orbital approach to e xplain, among other things, the concept of resonance, wh ich cannot adequately
be explained using other methods.
6.2.4.8: Summary
Molecular orbital theory, a delocalized approach to bond ing, can often explain a compound’s color, why a compound with
unpaired electrons is stable, semiconductor behavior, and resonance, none of which can be explained using a local ized
approach.
A molecular orbital (MO) is an allowed spatial distribution of electrons in a molecule that is associated with a particular orbit al
energy. Unlike an atomic orbital (AO), which is centere d on a single atom, a molecular orbital extends ove r all the atoms in a
molecule or ion. Hence the molecular orbital theory of bonding is a delocalized approach. Molecular orbitals are constructed
using linear combinations of atomic orbitals (LCAOs), which are usually the mathematical sums and differ ences of wave
functions that describe overlapping atomic orbitals. Atomic orbitals interact to form three types of molecular orbitals.
1. Orbitals or orbital lobes with the same sign interact to gi ve increased electron probability along the plane of the internuclear
axis because of constructive reinforcement of the wave functions. Consequently, elec trons in such molecular orbitals help to
hold the positively charged nuclei together. Such orbita ls are bonding molecular orbitals, and they are always lower in energy
than the parent atomic orbitals.
2. Orbitals or orbital lobes with opposite signs interact to give decreased electron probability density between th e nuclei because
of destructive interference of the wave functions. Consequently, elect rons in such molecular orbitals are primarily located
outside the internuclear region, leading to increased r epulsions between the positively charged nuclei. These o rbitals are called
antibonding molecular orbitals, and they are always higher in energy than the parent a tomic orbitals.
3. Some atomic orbitals interact only very weakly, and the re sulting molecular orbitals give essentially no change in the electron
probability density between the nuclei. Hence electrons in such orbitals have no effect on the bonding in a molecule o r ion.
These orbitals are nonbonding molecular orbitals, and they have approximately the same energy as the par ent atomic orbitals.N C
Exercise

6.2.4.18 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/355194A completely bonding molecular orbital contains no nodes (regions of zero electron probability) perpend icular to the internuclear
axis, whereas a completely antibonding molecular orbital contains at least one node perpendicular to the in ternuclear axis. A
sigma (σ) orbital (bonding) or a sigma star (σ*) orbital (antibonding) is symmetrical about the internuclea r axis. Hence all crosssections perpendicular to that axis are circular. B oth a pi (π) orbital (bonding) and a pi star (π*) orbital (antibonding) possess a
nodal plane that contains the nuclei, with electron densi ty localized on both sides of the plane.
The energies of the molecular orbitals versus those o f the parent atomic orbitals can be shown schematica lly in an energy-level
diagram. The electron configuration of a molecule is shown b y placing the correct number of electrons in the ap propriate energylevel diagram, starting with the lowest-energy orbita l and obeying the Pauli principle; that is, placing only two electrons with
opposite spin in each orbital. From the completed ene rgy-level diagram, we can calculate the bond order, defined as one-half the
net number of bonding electrons. In bond orders, el ectrons in antibonding molecular orbitals cancel elec trons in bonding molecular
orbitals, while electrons in nonbonding orbitals have no effect and are not counted. Bond orders of 1, 2, and 3 correspond to single,
double, and triple bonds, respectively. Molecules wit h predicted bond orders of 0 are generally less stab le than the isolated atoms
and do not normally exist.
Molecular orbital energy-level diagrams for diatomic molecules can be created if the electron configura tion of the parent atoms is
known, following a few simple rules. Most important, th e number of molecular orbitals in a molecule is the same as the number of
atomic orbitals that interact. The difference betwee n bonding and antibonding molecular orbital combina tions is proportional to the
overlap of the parent orbitals and decreases as the energy difference between the parent atomic orbital s increases. With such an
approach, the electronic structures of virtually all commonly encountered homonuclear diatomic molecules, molecules with two
identical atoms, can be understood. The molecular or bital approach correctly predicts that the O molecul e has two unpaired
electrons and hence is attracted into a magnetic fie ld. In contrast, most substances have only paired elec trons. A similar procedure
can be applied to molecules with two dissimilar atoms, called heteronuclear diatomic molecules, using a molecular orbital
energy-level diagram that is skewed or tilted toward t he more electronegative element. Molecular orbital th eory is able to describe
the bonding in a molecule with an odd number of electron s such as NO and even to predict something about its chemis try.
6.2.4.9: Contributors and Attributions
Modified by Joshua Halpern (Howard University)
This page titled 6.2.4: Molecular Orbital Theory is shared under a CC BY 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax.2

1SECTION OVERVIEW
Topic G- Chemical Equilibrium
WHAT YOU SHOULD BE ABLE TO DO WHEN YOU HA VE FINISHED THIS TOPIC:
1. Write the equilibrium constant expression for a chemic al reaction in terms of either partial pressures or molariti es, and
interconvert K and K for a gas-phase reaction.
2. Interpret the magnitude of an equilibrium constant.
3. Evaluate a reaction quotient, and use it to determine t he direction of a reaction.
4. Calculate a value for the equilibrium constant, given a ppropriate concentrations or gas pressures, and use this val ue to
determine concentrations/pressures in other equilibr ium mixtures.
5. Calculate final concentrations/pressures of reactan ts and products, given appropriate information about the initial
conditions.
6. Understand and apply le Châtelier’s Principle.
7. Use the ion product of water (K) to relate the concentr ations of H and OH in an aqueous solution.
8. Write the K expression for an acid, and interpret the n umerical value of K.
9. Calculate the pH of a solution of a strong acid or base, c alculate the pH of a solution of a weak acid given its K v alue, and
calculate the K of a weak acid given the pH of a solution of known molarity.
10. Identify the conjugate acid or base of a given speci es, and relate the strength of an acid to that of its conjug ate base.
7.1: Chemical Equilibrium
7.1.1: The Concept of Equilibrium
7.1.2: The Equilibrium Constant
7.1.3: Heterogeneous Equilibria
7.1.4: Equilibrium Stoichiometry Calculations
7.1.5: Applications of Equilibrium Constants
7.1.6: Le Chatelier's Principle
7.2: Introduction to Acid–Base Equilibria
7.2.1: Brønsted–Lowry Acids and Bases
7.2.2: Autoionization of Water
7.2.3: pH and pOH
7.2.4: Acid Strength
Topic G- Chemical Equilibrium is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.Learning Objectives
p
w+ –
a a
a
a

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
7.1: Chemical Equilibrium
In this chapter, we describe the methods chemists use to quantitatively describe the composition of chemic al systems at
equilibrium, and we discuss how factors such as temperat ure and pressure influence the equilibrium composit ion. As you study
these concepts, you will also learn how urban smog form s and how reaction conditions can be altered to produ ce H rather than the
combustion products CO and H O from the methane in natu ral gas. You will discover how to control the composit ion of the gases
emitted in automobile exhaust and how synthetic polym ers such as the polyacrylonitrile used in sweaters an d carpets are produced
on an industrial scale.
7.1.1: The Concept of Equilibrium
7.1.2: The Equilibrium Constant
7.1.3: Heterogeneous Equilibria
7.1.4: Equilibrium Stoichiometry Calculations
7.1.5: Applications of Equilibrium Constants
7.1.6: Le Chatelier's Principle
7.1: Chemical Equilibrium is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.2
2 2

7.1.1.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1700517.1.1: The Concept of Equilibrium
To understand what is meant by chemical equilibrium.
For most of the reactions that we have discussed so far in general chemistry, you have assumed that once rea ctants are converted to
products, they are likely to remain that way. In fact, however, virtually all chemical reactions are reversible to some extent. That is,
an opposing reaction occurs in which the products reac t, to a greater or lesser degree, to re-form the rea ctants. Eventually, the
forward and reverse reaction rates become the same, and the system reaches chemical equilibrium, the point at which the
composition of the system no longer changes with time.
Figure: Dinitrogen tetroxide is a powerful oxidizer that reacts spontaneously upon contact with various for ms of hydrazine,
which makes the pair a popular propellant combinatio n for rockets. Nitrogen dioxide at −196 °C, 0 °C, 23 °C, 35 °C, and 50 °C.
(NO) converts to the colorless dinitrogen tetroxide (N O) at low temperatures, and reverts to NO at higher t emperatures. Figure
used with permission from Wikipedia (CC BY-SA 3.0; Eframgoldberg).
Chemical equilibrium is a dynamic process that consis ts of a forward reaction, in which reactants are convert ed to products, and a
reverse reaction, in which products are converted to reactants. At equilibrium, the forward and reverse rea ctions proceed at equal
rates. Consider, for example, a simple system that con tains only one reactant and one product, the revers ible dissociation of
dinitrogen tetroxide () to nitrogen dioxide (). You may recall that is responsible for the brown color we associate with
smog. When a sealed tube containing solid (mp = −9.3 °C; bp = 21.2°C) is heated from −78.4°C to 25°C, the r ed-brown color
of appears (Figure). The reaction can be followed v isually because the product () is colored, whereas th e reactant (
) is colorless:
The double arrow indicates that both the forward reaction
and reverse reaction
occurring simultaneously (i.e, the reaction is reversi ble). However, this does not necessarily mean the system is at equilibrium as
the following chapter demonstrates.
Figure shows how the composition of this system would va ry as a function of time at a constant temperature. If the initial
concentration of were zero, then it increases as the concentration of decreases. Eventually the compositi on of the system
stops changing with time, and chemical equilibrium is achieved. Conversely, if we start with a sample that c ontains no but an
initial concentration twice the initial concentrati on of (Figure), in accordance with the stoichiometry of the
reaction, we reach exactly the same equilibrium comp osition (Figure). Thus equilibrium can be approached from either
direction in a chemical reaction.Learning Objectives
2 2 4 2

7.1.1.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170051
Figure: The Composition of / Mixtures as a Function of Time at Room Temperature. (a) Initially, this ideal ized
system contains 0.0500 M gaseous and no gaseous. The con centration of decreases with time as the concentratio n
of increases. (b) Initially, this system contains 0.1000 M and no. The concentration of decreases with tim e as
the concentration of increases. In both cases, the fin al concentrations of the substances are the same: [] = 0.0422 M and [
] = 0.0156 M at equilibrium.
Figure shows the forward and reverse reaction rates fo r a sample that initially contains pure. Because th e initial
concentration of is zero, the forward reaction rate (dissociation of) is initially zero as well. In cont rast, the reverse
reaction rate (dimerization of) is initially very high (), but it decreases rapidly as the concentration o f
decreases. As the concentration of increases, the rat e of dissociation of increases—but more slowly than the
dimerization of —because the reaction is only first order in (rate =, where is the rate constant for t he forward
reaction in Equations and). Eventually, the forward and reverse reaction rates become identical,, and the system
has reached chemical equilibrium. If the forward and reverse reactions occur at different rates, then the system is not at
equilibrium.
Figure: The Forward and Reverse Reaction Rates as a Fun ction of Time for the ⇌2 System Shown in Part (b)
in Figure
The rate of dimerization of (reverse reaction) dec reases rapidly with time, as expected for a second-or der reaction. Because the
initial concentration of is zero, the rate of the dissociation reaction (forward reaction) at is also zero. As the dimerization
reaction proceeds, the concentration increases, and its rate of dissociation also increases. Eventually the rat es of the two
reactions are equal: chemical equilibrium has been reac hed, and the concentrations of and no longer change.
At equilibrium, the forward reaction rate is equal to the reverse reaction rate.

7.1.1.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170051The three reaction systems (1, 2, and 3) depicted in the a ccompanying illustration can all be described by the e quation:
where the blue circles are and the purple ovals are. Each set of panels shows the changing composition of one of the three
reaction mixtures as a function of time. Which system took the longest to reach chemical equilibrium?
Given: three reaction systems
Asked for: relative time to reach chemical equilibrium
Strategy:
Compare the concentrations of A and B at different times. The system whose composition takes the longest to stabilize took the
longest to reach chemical equilibrium.
Solution:
In systems 1 and 3, the concentration of A decreases from through but is the same at both and. Thus s ystems 1 and 3 are at
equilibrium by. In system 2, the concentrations of A and B are still changing between and, so system 2 may not yet have
reached equilibrium by. Thus system 2 took the longest to reach chemical equilibrium.
In the following illustration, A is represented by blu e circles, B by purple squares, and C by orange oval s; the equation for the
reaction is A + B ⇌ C. The sets of panels represent the compositions of thr ee reaction mixtures as a function of time. Which, if
any, of the systems shown has reached equilibrium?
Answer
system 2
Summary
At equilibrium, the forward and reverse reactions of a system proceed at equal rates. Chemical equilibriu m is a dynamic process
consisting of forward and reverse reactions that proc eed at equal rates. At equilibrium, the composition of the system no longer
changes with time. The composition of an equilibrium m ixture is independent of the direction from which eq uilibrium is
approached.
7.1.1: The Concept of Equilibrium is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.Example
Exercise

7.1.2.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1700527.1.2: The Equilibrium Constant
To write an equilibrium constant expression for any homoge nous reaction.
To manipulate the equilibrium constant expression for var ious forms of an equation.
To calculate an equilibrium constant from a sum of react ions with known K values.
Because an equilibrium state is achieved when the for ward reaction rate equals the reverse reaction rate, under a given set of
conditions there must be a relationship between the composition of the system at equilibrium and the ki netics of a reaction. In a
future course, you will explore rates of reaction qua ntitatively. In this section, we will focus on the empi rically observed changes in
composition of the system.
Table lists the initial and equilibrium concentratio ns from five different experiments using the reaction system described by:
At equilibrium the magnitude of the quantity is ess entially the same for all five experiments. In fact, no matter what
the initial concentrations of and are, at equilibr ium the quantity will always be at 25°C,
which corresponds to the ratio of the rate constants f or the forward and reverse reactions. That is, at a given temperature, the
equilibrium constant for a reaction always has the s ame value, even though the specific concentrations o f the reactants and products
vary depending on their initial concentrations.
Table: Initial and Equilibrium Concentrations for Mixtures at 25°C
Initial Concentrations Concentrations at Equilibrium
Experiment [] (M) [] (M) [] (M) [] (M)
1 0.0500 0.0000 0.0417 0.0165
2 0.0000 0.1000 0.0417 0.0165
3 0.0750 0.0000 0.0647 0.0206
4 0.0000 0.0750 0.0304 0.0141
5 0.0250 0.0750 0.0532 0.0186
Developing an Equilibrium Constant Expression
In 1864, the Norwegian chemists Cato Guldberg (1836–190 2) and Peter Waage (1833–1900) carefully measured the compositions
of many reaction systems at equilibrium. They discovered that for any reversible reaction of the general form
where A and B are reactants, C and D are products, an d a, b, c, and d are the stoichiometric coefficients in the balanced chemical
equation for the reaction, the ratio of the product of the equilibrium concentrations of the products (r aised to their coefficients in the
balanced chemical equation) to the product of the e quilibrium concentrations of the reactants (raised to their coefficients in the
balanced chemical equation) is always a constant unde r a given set of conditions. This relationship is known as the law of mass
action (or law of chemical equilibrium) and can be stat ed as follows:
where is the equilibrium constant for the reaction. Equation is called the equilibrium equation, and th e right side of
Equation is called the equilibrium constant expressi on. The relationship shown in Equation is true for a ny pair of
opposing reactions regardless of the mechanism of the r eaction or the number of steps in the mechanism.Learning Objectives

7.1.2.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170052The equilibrium constant can vary over a wide range of values. The values of shown in Table, for example, vary by 60
orders of magnitude. Because products are in the num erator of the equilibrium constant expression and r eactants are in the
denominator, values of K greater than indicate a st rong tendency for reactants to form products. In this case, chemists say that
equilibrium lies to the right as written, favoring the formation of products. An example is the reaction betwe en and to
produce, which has an equilibrium constant of at 30 0 K. Because is a good reductant and is a good oxid ant,
the reaction proceeds essentially to completion. In contrast, values of less than indicate that the rat io of products to reactants
at equilibrium is very small. That is, reactants do not tend to form products readily, and the equilibrium lies to the left as written,
favoring the formation of reactants.
Table: Equilibrium Constants for Selected Reactions*
Reaction Temperature (K) Equilibrium Constant (K)
*Equilibrium constants vary with temperature. The K va lues shown are for systems at the indicated temperatures.
You will also notice in Table that equilibrium cons tants have no units, even though Equation suggests th at the units of
concentration might not always cancel because the ex ponents may vary. In fact, equilibrium constants are calculated using
“effective concentrations,” or activities, of reactants a nd products, which are the ratios of the measured concentrations to a
standard state of 1 M. As shown in Equation, the units of concentration cancel, whi ch makes unitless as well:
Because equilibrium constants are calculated using “effective concentrati ons” relative to
a standard state of 1 M, values of K are unitless.
Many reactions have equilibrium constants between 100 0 and 0.001 (), neither very large nor very small. At
equilibrium, these systems tend to contain significan t amounts of both products and reactants, indicating t hat there is not a strong
tendency to form either products from reactants or r eactants from products. An example of this type of sys tem is the reaction of
gaseous hydrogen and deuterium, a component of high-stab ility fiber-optic light sources used in ocean studies, to form:
The equilibrium constant expression for this reaction is

7.1.2.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170052with varying between 1.9 and 4 over a wide temperature range (100–1000 K). Thus an equilibrium mixture of,, and
contains significant concentrations of both product and r eactants.
Figure summarizes the relationship between the magnit ude of K and the relative concentrations of reactants and products at
equilibrium for a general reaction, written as react ants products. When is a large number, and the concentration of products at
equilibrium predominate. This corresponds to an essent ially irreversible reaction. Conversely, when is a ver y small number, and
the reaction produces almost no products as written. Sy stems for which have significant concentrations of bo th reactants and
products at equilibrium.
Figure: The Relationship between the Composition of t he Mixture at Equilibrium and the Magnitude of the Equilibrium
Constant. The larger the K, the farther the reaction proceeds to the right before equilibrium is reached, and the greater the ratio of
products to reactants at equilibrium.
A large value of the equilibrium constant means that products predominate at
equilibrium; a small value means that reactants predominate at equilibrium.
Write the for each reaction.
Given: balanced chemical equations
Asked for: equilibrium constant expressions
Strategy:
Refer to Equation. Place the arithmetic product of the concentrations of the products (raised to their st oichiometric
coefficients) in the numerator and the product of t he concentrations of the reactants (raised to their sto ichiometric coefficients)
in the denominator.
Solution:
The only product is ammonia, which has a coefficient o f 2. For the reactants, has a coefficient of 1 and has a coefficient
of 3. The equilibrium constant expression is as follows:
The only product is carbon dioxide, which has a coeff icient of 1. The reactants are, with a coefficient of 1, and, with a
coefficient of. Thus the equilibrium constant expression is as follows:Example: equilibrium constant expressions

7.1.2.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170052This reaction is the reverse of the reaction in part b, with all coefficients multiplied by 2 to remove the fractional coefficient for
. The equilibrium constant expression is therefore the in verse of the expression in part b, with all exponents multipli ed by 2
Write the equilibrium constant expression for each reac tion.
a.
b.
c.
Answer a
Answer b
Answer c
Predict which systems at equilibrium will (a) contain e ssentially only products, (b) contain essentially only reactants, and (c)
contain appreciable amounts of both products and react ants.
1.
2.
3.
4.
Given: systems and values of
Asked for: composition of systems at equilibrium
Strategy:
Use the value of the equilibrium constant to determin e whether the equilibrium mixture will contain essenti ally only products,
essentially only reactants, or significant amounts of b oth.
Solution:
a. Only system 4 has, so at equilibrium it will consist of es sentially only products.
b. System 2 has, so the reactants have little tendency to form products under the conditions specified; thus, at
equilibrium the system will contain essentially only reacta nts.
c. Both systems 1 and 3 have equilibrium constants in th e range, indicating that the equilibrium mixtures wil l
contain appreciable amounts of both products and react ants.Exercise
Example

7.1.2.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170052Hydrogen and nitrogen react to form ammonia according to th e following balanced chemical equation:
Values of the equilibrium constant at various temperatures we re reported as
, and
a. At which temperature would you expect to find the high est proportion of and in the equilibrium mixture?
b. Assuming that the reaction rates are fast enough so that equilibrium is reached quickly, at what temperature wo uld you
design a commercial reactor to operate to maximize the yie ld of ammonia?
Answer a
327°C, where is smallest
Answer b
25°C
Variations in the Form of the Equilibrium Constant Expression
Because equilibrium can be approached from either d irection in a chemical reaction, the equilibrium co nstant expression and thus
the magnitude of the equilibrium constant depend on the form in which the chemical reaction is written. For example, if we write
the reaction described in Equation in reverse, we obtai n the following:
The corresponding equilibrium constant is as follows:
This expression is the inverse of the expression for the original equilibrium constant, so. That is, when we write a reaction
in the reverse direction, the equilibrium constant e xpression is inverted. For instance, the equilibrium c onstant for the reaction
is as follows:
but for the opposite reaction,, the equilibrium constant K′ is given by the inverse expression:
Consider another example, the formation of water:. Be cause is a good reductant and is a good
oxidant, this reaction has a very large equilibrium c onstant (at 500 K). Consequently, the equilibrium con stant for
the reverse reaction, the decomposition of water to fo rm and, is very small:. As
suggested by the very small equilibrium constant, a nd fortunately for life as we know it, a substantial a mount of energy is indeed
needed to dissociate water into and.
The equilibrium constant for a reaction written in reverse is the inv erse of the equilibrium
constant for the reaction as written originally.
Writing an equation in different but chemically equ ivalent forms also causes both the equilibrium const ant expression and the
magnitude of the equilibrium constant to be different. For example, we could write the equation for the reactionExercise

7.1.2.6 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170052as
with the equilibrium constant K″ is as follows:
The values for K′ (Equation) and K″ are related as fol lows:
In general, if all the coefficients in a balanced ch emical equation were subsequently multiplied by, th en the new equilibrium
constant is the original equilibrium constant raised t o the power.
At 745 K, K is 0.118 for the following reaction:
What is the equilibrium constant for each related reacti on at 745 K?
a.
b.
Given: balanced equilibrium equation, K at a given temperatur e, and equations of related reactions
Asked for: values of for related reactions
Strategy:
Write the equilibrium constant expression for the gi ven reaction and for each related reaction. From the se expressions,
calculate for each reaction.
Solution:
The equilibrium constant expression for the given react ion of with to produce at 745 K is as follows:
This reaction is the reverse of the one given, so its equilib rium constant expression is as follows:
In this reaction, the stoichiometric coefficients o f the given reaction are divided by 2, so the equili brium constant is calculated
as follows:
At 527°C, the equilibrium constant for the reaction
is. Calculate the equilibrium constant for the followin g reaction at the same temperature:Example: The Haber Process
Exercise

7.1.2.7 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170052Answer
Equilibrium Constant Expressions for Systems that Contain Gases
For reactions that involve species in solution, the con centrations used in equilibrium calculations are usual ly expressed in
moles/liter. For gases, however, the concentrations are usually expressed in terms of partial pressures rathe r than molarity, where
the standard state is 1 atm of pressure. The symbol is used to denote equilibrium constants calculated fr om partial pressures. For
the general reaction, in which all the components a re gases, the equilibrium constant expression can be wr itten
as the ratio of the partial pressures of the products and reactants (each raised to its coefficient in the chemical equ ation):
Thus for the decomposition of (Equation 15.1) is as f ollows:
Like, is a unitless quantity because the quantity that is actually used to calculate it is an “effect ive pressure,” the ratio of the
measured pressure to a standard state of 1 bar (appr oximately 1 atm), which produces a unitless quantity. T he “effective pressure”
is called the fugacity, just as activity is the effective con centration.
Because partial pressures are usually expressed in at mospheres or mmHg, the molar concentration of a gas an d its partial pressure
do not have the same numerical value. Consequently, t he numerical values of and are usually different. T hey are, however,
related by the ideal gas constant () and the absolute tem perature ():
where is the equilibrium constant expressed in units of concentration and is the difference between the numbers of moles of
gaseous products and gaseous reactants (). The temperature is expressed as the abs olute temperature in Kelvin. According
to Equation, only if the moles of gaseous products a nd gaseous reactants are the same (i.e.,). For the
decomposition of, there are 2 mol of gaseous product and 1 mol of gaseous reactant, so. Thus, for this reaction,
The equilibrium constant for the reaction of nitrog en and hydrogen to give ammonia is 0.118 at 745 K. The balanced
equilibrium equation is as follows:
What is for this reaction at the same temperature?
Given: equilibrium equation, equilibrium constant, and tempe rature
Asked for:
Strategy:
Use the coefficients in the balanced chemical equation to calculate. Then use Equation to calculate from.
Solution:
This reaction has 2 mol of gaseous product and 4 mol of gaseous reactants, so. We know, and.
Thus, from Equation, we have the following:Example: The Haber Process (again)

7.1.2.8 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170052Because is a unitless quantity, the answer is.
Calculate for the reaction
at 527°C, if at this temperature.
Answer
Equilibrium Constant Expressions for the Sums of Reactions
Chemists frequently need to know the equilibrium con stant for a reaction that has not been previously stu died. In such cases, the
desired reaction can often be written as the sum of o ther reactions for which the equilibrium constants ar e known. The equilibrium
constant for the unknown reaction can then be calculated from the tabulated values for the other reactions.
To illustrate this procedure, let’s consider the react ion of with to give. This reaction is an important source of the
that gives urban smog its typical brown color. The re action normally occurs in two distinct steps. In the f irst reaction (step 1),
reacts with at the high temperatures inside an inte rnal combustion engine to give. The released then reacts with
additional to give (step 2). The equilibrium consta nt for each reaction at 100°C is also given.
Summing reactions (step 1) and (step 2) gives the overal l reaction of with:
The equilibrium constant expressions for the reactions ar e as follows:
What is the relationship between,, and, all at 10 0°C? The expression for has in the numerator, the expression
for has in the denominator, and does not appear in the expression for. Multiplying by and canceling the
terms,
Thus the product of the equilibrium constant expressions for and is the same as the equilibrium constant expr ession for:
The equilibrium constant for a reaction that is the sum of two or more reactions is equal to the product of the equilibrium constants
for the individual reactions. In contrast, recall th at according to Hess’s Law, for the sum of two or mor e reactions is the sum of
the ΔH values for the individual reactions.Exercise

7.1.2.9 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170052To determine for a reaction that is the sum of two or more reactions, add the reactions
but multiply the equilibrium constants.
The following reactions occur at 1200°C:
1.
2.
Calculate the equilibrium constant for the following re action at the same temperature.
3.
Given: two balanced equilibrium equations, values of, and an equ ilibrium equation for the overall reaction
Asked for: equilibrium constant for the overall reaction
Strategy:
Arrange the equations so that their sum produces the overall equation. If an equation had to be reversed, invert the value of
for that equation. Calculate for the overall equatio n by multiplying the equilibrium constants for the indi vidual equations.
Solution:
The key to solving this problem is to recognize that react ion 3 is the sum of reactions 1 and 2:
The values for and are given, so it is straightforward to calculate:
In the first of two steps in the industrial synthesis o f sulfuric acid, elemental sulfur reacts with oxygen to produce sulfur
dioxide. In the second step, sulfur dioxide reacts with additional oxygen to form sulfur trioxide. The rea ction for each step is
shown, as is the value of the corresponding equilibri um constant at 25°C. Calculate the equilibrium consta nt for the overall
reaction at this same temperature.
1.
2.
3.
Answer
Summary
For a system at equilibrium, the law of mass action r elates to the ratio of the equilibrium concentrati ons of the products to the
concentrations of the reactants raised to their res pective powers to match the coefficients in the equi librium equation. The ratio is
called the equilibrium constant expression. Under a g iven set of conditions, a reaction will always have the same. When a
reaction is written in the reverse direction, and the equilibrium constant expression are inverted. For gase s, the equilibrium
constant expression can be written as the ratio of t he partial pressures of the products to the partial pressures of the reactants, each
raised to a power matching its coefficient in the che mical equation. An equilibrium constant calculated fr om partial pressures ()Example
Exercise

7.1.2.10 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170052is related to by the ideal gas constant (), the tem perature (), and the change in the number of moles o f gas during the reaction.
An equilibrium system that contains products and react ants in a single phase is a homogeneous equilibrium; a system whose
reactants, products, or both are in more than one p hase is a heterogeneous equilibrium. When a reactio n can be expressed as the
sum of two or more reactions, its equilibrium consta nt is equal to the product of the equilibrium consta nts for the individual
reactions.
The law of mass action describes a system at equilibr ium in terms of the concentrations of the products and the reactants.
For a system involving one or more gases, either the mola r concentrations of the gases or their partial pressures can be used.
Equilibrium constant expression (law of mass action):
Equilibrium constant expression for reactions involving gases using partial pressures:
Relationship between and:
7.1.2: The Equilibrium Constant is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

7.1.3.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1700557.1.3: Heterogeneous Equilibria
To understand how different phases affect equilibria.
When the products and reactants of an equilibrium r eaction form a single phase, whether gas or liquid, th e system is a
homogeneous equilibrium. In such situations, the con centrations of the reactants and products can vary over a wide range. In
contrast, a system whose reactants, products, or both are in more than one phase is a heterogeneous equilib rium, such as the
reaction of a gas with a solid or liquid.
As noted in the previous section, the equilibrium cons tant expression is actually a ratio of activities. To s implify the calculations in
general chemistry courses, the activity of each substanc e in the reaction is often approximated using a ratio of the molarity of a
substance compared to the standard state of that sub stance. For substances that are liquids or solids, the standard state is just the
concentration of the substance within the liquid or s olid. Because the molar concentrations of pure liqu ids and solids normally do
not vary greatly with temperature, the ratio of the molarity to the standard state for substances that are liquids or solids always has a
value of 1. For example, for a compound such as CaF (s), the term going into the equilibrium expression is [CaF]/[CaF] which
cancels to unity. Thus, when the activities of the solid s and liquids (including solvents) are incorporated into the equilibrium
expression, they do not change the value.
Consider the following reaction, which is used in the fina l firing of some types of pottery to produce brilliant me tallic glazes:
The glaze is created when metal oxides are reduced to metals by the product, carbon monoxide. The equilibr ium constant
expression for this reaction is as follows:
The equilibrium constant for this reaction can also be wri tten in terms of the partial pressures of the gases:
Incorporating all the constant values into or allows us to focus on the substances whose concentrations c hange during the
reaction.
Although the activities of pure liquids or solids are not written explicitly in the equilibrium constant expression, these substances
must be present in the reaction mixture for chemica l equilibrium to occur. Whatever the concentrations of and, the system
described in Equation will reach chemical equilibri um only if a stoichiometric amount of solid carbon or excess solid carbon
has been added so that some is still present once the system has reached equilibrium. As shown in Figure, it does not matter
whether 1 g or 100 g of solid carbon is present; in e ither case, the composition of the gaseous components o f the system will be the
same at equilibrium.
Learning Objectives
2 2 2

7.1.3.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170055
Figure: Effect of the Amount of Solid Present on Equilibrium in a Heterogeneous Solid–Gas System. In the system, the
equilibrium composition of the gas phase at a given tempera ture, 1000 K in this case, is the same whether a small amount of solid
carbon (left) or a large amount (right) is present.
Write each expression for, incorporating all constant s, and for the following equilibrium reactions.
a.
b.
Given: balanced equilibrium equations
Asked for: expressions for and
Strategy:
Find by writing each equilibrium constant expression as the ratio of the concentrations of the products an d reactants, each
raised to its coefficient in the chemical equation. T hen express as the ratio of the partial pressures of the products and
reactants, each also raised to its coefficient in the chemical equation.
Solution
This reaction contains a pure solid () and a pure liq uid (). Their activities are equal to 1, so when inco rporated into
the equilibrium constant expression, they do not change the value. So
and
This reaction contains two pure solids (and), which are each assigned a value of 1 in the equilibrium const ant
expressions:
and
Write the expressions for and for the following reactio ns.
a.
b.
Answer a
and
Answer b
and
For reactions carried out in solution, the solvent is assumed to be pure, and therefore is assigned an act ivity equal to 1 in the
equilibrium constant expression. The activities of th e solutes are approximated by their molarities. The re sult is that the equilibriumExample
Exercise

7.1.3.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170055constant expressions appear to only depend upon the con centrations of the solutes.
The activities of pure solids, pure liquids, and solvents are defined as havi ng a value of
'1'. Often, it is said that these activities are "left out" of equi librium constant expressions.
This is an unfortunate use of words. The activities are not "left out" of equilibrium
constant expressions. Rather, because they have a value of '1', they do not change the
value of the equilibrium constant when they are multiplied together with t he other terms.
The activities of the solutes are approximated by their molarities.
Summary
An equilibrated system that contains products and rea ctants in a single phase is a homogeneous equilibrium; a system whose
reactants, products, or both are in more than one phase is a heterogeneous equilibrium.
Contributors and Attributions
Anonymous
Modified by Tom Neils (Grand Rapids Community College)
7.1.3: Heterogeneous Equilibria is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

7.1.4.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1700567.1.4: Equilibrium Stoichiometry Calculations
To solve quantitative problems involving chemical equil ibriums.
There are two fundamental kinds of equilibrium problems:
1. those in which we are given the concentrations of the rea ctants and the products at equilibrium (or, more oft en, information that
allows us to calculate these concentrations), and we are a sked to calculate the equilibrium constant for the rea ction; and
2. those in which we are given the equilibrium constant and th e initial concentrations of reactants, and we are asked to calculate
the concentration of one or more substances at equili brium. In this section, we describe methods for solving bot h kinds of
problems.
Calculating an Equilibrium Constant from Equilibrium Concentrations
The equilibrium constant for the decomposition of t o and is. At 800°C, the concentration of
in equilibrium with solid and is. Thus K at 800°C is. (Remember that equilibrium constants
are unitless.)
A more complex example of this type of problem is th e conversion of n-butane, an additive used to increa se the volatility of
gasoline, into isobutane (2-methylpropane).
This reaction can be written as follows:
and the equilibrium constant. At equilibrium, a mixtu re of n-butane and isobutane at room temperature
was found to contain 0.041 M isobutane and 0.016 M n-b utane. Substituting these concentrations into the equ ilibrium constant
expression,
Thus the equilibrium constant for the reaction as written i s 2.6.
Example
The reaction between gaseous sulfur dioxide and oxygen is a key step in the industrial synthesis of sulfuric acid:
A mixture of and was maintained at 800 K until the syste m reached equilibrium. The equilibrium mixture conta ined
, and
Calculate and at this temperature.Learning Objectives

7.1.4.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170056Given: balanced equilibrium equation and composition of equi librium mixture
Asked for: equilibrium constant
Strategy
Write the equilibrium constant expression for the re action. Then substitute the appropriate equilibrium concentrations into this
equation to obtain.
Solution
Substituting the appropriate equilibrium concentrations into the equilibrium constant expression,
To solve for, we use the relationship derived previously
where:
Exercise
Hydrogen gas and iodine react to form hydrogen iodide v ia the reaction
A mixture of and was maintained at 740 K until the syste m reached equilibrium. The equilibrium mixture conta ined
, and
Calculate and for this reaction.
Answer
and
Chemists are not often given the concentrations of all the substances, and they are not likely to measu re the equilibrium
concentrations of all the relevant substances for a p articular system. In such cases, we can obtain the equi librium concentrations
from the initial concentrations of the reactants and the balanced chemical equation for the reaction, as long as the equilibrium
concentration of one of the substances is known. Example s hows one way to do this.
A 1.00 mol sample of was placed in a 2.00 L reactor and heated to 227°C until the system reached equilib rium. The
contents of the reactor were then analyzed and found to contain 0.056 mol of. Calculate at this temper ature. The
equation for the decomposition of to and is as follows:
Given: balanced equilibrium equation, amount of reactant, vol ume, and amount of one product at equilibrium
Asked for:
Strategy:Example

7.1.4.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170056A. Write the equilibrium constant expression for the react ion. Construct a table showing the initial concentrations, t he changes
in concentrations, and the final concentrations (as initi al concentrations plus changes in concentrations).
B. Calculate all possible initial concentrations from the data given and insert them in the table.
C. Use the coefficients in the balanced chemical equat ion to obtain the changes in concentration of all other su bstances in the
reaction. Insert those concentration changes in the table.
D. Obtain the final concentrations by summing the columns. Calculate the equilibrium constant for the reaction.
Solution
A The first step in any such problem is to balance the chemical equation for the reaction (if it is not alr eady balanced) and use
it to derive the equilibrium constant expression. In this case, the equation is already balanced, and the equilibrium constant
expression is as follows:
To obtain the concentrations of,, and at equilib rium, we construct a table showing what is known and what needs
to be calculated. We begin by writing the balanced ch emical equation at the top of the table, followed by three lines
corresponding to the initial concentrations, the chan ges in concentrations required to get from the init ial to the final state, and
the final concentrations.
ICE
Initial
Change
Final
B Initially, the system contains 1.00 mol of in a 2.0 0 L container. Thus. The initial
concentrations of and are because initially no p roducts are present. Moreover, we are told that at equi librium the
system contains 0.056 mol of in a 2.00 L container, so. We insert these values into the
following table:
ICE
Initial 0.500 0 0
Change
Final 0.028
C We use the stoichiometric relationships given in th e balanced chemical equation to find the change in the concentration of
, the substance for which initial and final concentratio ns are known:
According to the coefficients in the balanced chemic al equation, 2 mol of are produced for every 1 mol of, so the
change in the concentration is as follows:
Similarly, 2 mol of are consumed for every 1 mol of produced, so the change in the concentration is a s
follows:

7.1.4.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170056We insert these values into our table:
ICE
Initial 0.500 0 0
Change −0.056 +0.056 +0.028
Final 0.028
D We sum the numbers in the and columns to obtain the f inal concentrations of and:
We can now complete the table:
ICE \([NOCl]
initial 0.500 0 0
change −0.056 +0.056 +0.028
final 0.444 0.056 0.028
We can now calculate the equilibrium constant for the rea ction:
The German chemist Fritz Haber (1868–1934; Nobel Prize i n Chemistry 1918) was able to synthesize ammonia () by
reacting and at about 500°C. At equilibrium, the mi xture contained 0.00272 M. What is for
the reaction
at this temperature? What is?
Answer
and
Calculating Equilibrium Concentrations from the Equilibrium Constant
To describe how to calculate equilibrium concentrati ons from an equilibrium constant, we first consider a s ystem that contains only
a single product and a single reactant, the convers ion of n-butane to isobutane (Equation), for which K = 2.6 at 25°C. If we
begin with a 1.00 M sample of n-butane, we can determ ine the concentration of n-butane and isobutane at equilibrium by
constructing a table showing what is known and what needs to b e calculated, just as we did in Example.Exercise

7.1.4.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170056ICE
Initial
Change
Final
The initial concentrations of the reactant and prod uct are both known: [n-butane]i = 1.00 M and [isobutan e]i = 0 M. We need to
calculate the equilibrium concentrations of both n-b utane and isobutane. Because it is generally diffic ult to calculate final
concentrations directly, we focus on the change in th e concentrations of the substances between the initial and the final
(equilibrium) conditions. If, for example, we define the change in the concentration of isobutane (Δ[iso butane]) as, then the
change in the concentration of n-butane is Δ[n-buta ne] =. This is because the balanced chemical equati on for the reaction tells
us that 1 mol of n-butane is consumed for every 1 mo l of isobutane produced. We can then express the fi nal concentrations in terms
of the initial concentrations and the changes they have u ndergone.
ICE
Initial 1.00 0
Change
Final
Substituting the expressions for the final concentrations of n-butane and isobutane from the table into the equilib rium equation,
Rearranging and solving for,
We obtain the final concentrations by substituting th is value into the expressions for the final concentra tions of n-butane and
isobutane listed in the table:
We can check the results by substituting them back i nto the equilibrium constant expression to see wheth er they give the same
that we used in the calculation:
This is the same we were given, so we can be confident of our r esults.
Example illustrates a common type of equilibrium problem that you are likely to encounter.
The water–gas shift reaction is important in several c hemical processes, such as the production of H for fu el cells. This
reaction can be written as follows:Example: The water–gas shift reaction

7.1.4.6 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170056 at 700 K. If a mixture of gases that initially contain s 0.0150 M and 0.0150 M is allowed to equilibrate at 700
K, what are the final concentrations of all substances pres ent?
Given: balanced equilibrium equation,, and initial concentra tions
Asked for: final concentrations
Strategy:
A. Construct a table showing what is known and what needs to b e calculated. Define as the change in the concentration o f
one substance. Then use the reaction stoichiometry to expr ess the changes in the concentrations of the other substance s in
terms of. From the values in the table, calculate the final concentrations.
B. Write the equilibrium equation for the reaction. Subst itute appropriate values from the ICE table to obtain.
C. Calculate the final concentrations of all species pr esent. Check your answers by substituting these values int o the
equilibrium constant expression to obtain.
Solution
A The initial concentrations of the reactants are. Just as before, we will focus on the change in the
concentrations of the various substances between the initial and final states. If we define the change in the concentration of
as, then. We can use the stoichiometry of the reac tion to express the changes in the concentrations of the
other substances in terms of. For example, 1 mol of is produced for every 1 mol of, so the change in the
concentration can be expressed as. Similarly, for e very 1 mol of produced, 1 mol each of and are
consumed, so the change in the concentration of the reactants is. We enter the values in the following
table and calculate the final concentrations.
ICE
Initial 0.0150 0.0150 0 0
Change
Final
B We can now use the equilibrium equation and the given to solve for:
We could solve this equation with the quadratic formu la, but it is far easier to solve for by recognizing that the left side of the
equation is a perfect square; that is,
Taking the square root of the middle and right terms,
C The final concentrations of all species in the reactio n mixture are as follows:

7.1.4.7 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170056We can check our work by inserting the calculated values back into the equilibrium constant expression:
To two significant figures, this K is the same as the value giv en in the problem, so our answer is confirmed.
Hydrogen gas reacts with iodine vapor to give hydrogen iodid e according to the following chemical equation:
at 425°C. If 0.172 M and are injected into a reac tor and maintained at 425°C until the system equili brates, what is
the final concentration of each substance in the reactio n mixture?
Answer
In Example, the initial concentrations of the react ants were the same, which gave us an equation that was a perfect square
and simplified our calculations. Often, however, the in itial concentrations of the reactants are not the sam e, and/or one or more of
the products may be present when the reaction starts. Un der these conditions, there is usually no way to simpli fy the problem, and
we must determine the equilibrium concentrations with o ther means. Such a case is described in Example.
In the water–gas shift reaction shown in Example, a s ample containing 0.632 M CO2 and 0.570 M is allowed t o
equilibrate at 700 K. At this temperature,. What is the comp osition of the reaction mixture at equilibrium?
Given: balanced equilibrium equation, concentrations of reac tants, and
Asked for: composition of reaction mixture at equilibrium
Strategy:
A. Write the equilibrium equation. Construct a table sho wing the initial concentrations of all substances in the mixt ure.
Complete the table showing the changes in the concentrati ons (\(x) and the final concentrations.
B. Write the equilibrium constant expression for the rea ction. Substitute the known K value and the final concentra tions to
solve for.
C. Calculate the final concentration of each substance in the reaction mixture. Check your answers by substituting th ese values
into the equilibrium constant expression to obtain.
Solution
A and. Again, is defined as the change in the conc entration of:. Because
1 mol of is produced for every 1 mol of, the chang e in the concentration of is the same as the change in the
concentration of H2O, so Δ[CO] = +x. Similarly, because 1 mol each of and are consumed for every 1 mol of
produced,. The final concentrations are the sums o f the initial concentrations and the changes in
concentrations at equilibrium.Exercise
Example

7.1.4.8 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170056ICE
Initial 0.570 0.632 0 0
Change
Final
B We can now use the equilibrium equation and the known value to solve for:
In contrast to Example, however, there is no obvious way to simplify this expression. Thus we must expand the
expression and multiply both sides by the denominator:
Collecting terms on one side of the equation,
This equation can be solved using the quadratic formula:
Only the answer with the positive value has any physical significance, so, and
C The final concentrations of all species in the reacti on mixture are as follows:
We can check our work by substituting these values into the equilibrium constant expression:
Because is essentially the same as the value given in the problem, our calculations are confirmed.
The exercise in Example showed the reaction of hydro gen and iodine vapor to form hydrogen iodide, for whi ch
at 425°C. If a sample containing 0.200 M and 0.0450 M is allowed to equilibrate at 425°C, what is the final
concentration of each substance in the reaction mixture?
Answer
In many situations it is not necessary to solve a qua dratic (or higher-order) equation. Most of these ca ses involve reactions for
which the equilibrium constant is either very small () or very large (), which means that the change in theExercise

7.1.4.9 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170056concentration (defined as) is essentially negligible compared with the initial concentration of a substan ce. Knowing this
simplifies the calculations dramatically, as illustrated in Example.
Atmospheric nitrogen and oxygen react to form nitric oxid e:
with at 25°C.
What is the partial pressure of NO in equilibrium with and in the atmosphere (at 1 atm, and
Given: balanced equilibrium equation and values of,, and
Asked for: partial pressure of NO
Strategy:
A. Construct a table and enter the initial partial pressu res, the changes in the partial pressures that occur duri ng the course of
the reaction, and the final partial pressures of all subst ances.
B. Write the equilibrium equation for the reaction. The n substitute values from the table to solve for the cha nge in
concentration (\(x).
C. Calculate the partial pressure of. Check your answer by substituting values into the equilibrium equation and so lving
for.
Solution
A Because we are given Kp and partial pressures are rep orted in atmospheres, we will use partial pressures. The i nitial partial
pressure of is 0.21 atm and that of is 0.78 atm. If we define the change in the partial pressure of as, then the
change in the partial pressure of and of is becaus e 1 mol each of and of is consumed for every 2 mol of NO
produced. Each substance has a final partial pressure equal to the sum of the initial pressure and the c hange in that pressure at
equilibrium.
ICE
Initial 0.78 0.21 0
Change
Final
B Substituting these values into the equation for the equil ibrium constant,
In principle, we could multiply out the terms in the denominator, rearrange, and solve the resulting quad ratic equation. In
practice, it is far easier to recognize that an equil ibrium constant of this magnitude means that the ext ent of the reaction will be
very small; therefore, the value will be negligible compared with the initial concentrations. If this assum ption is correct, then
to two significant figures, and. Substituting these expres sions into our original equation,Example

7.1.4.10 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170056C Substituting this value of into our expressions for the fi nal partial pressures of the substances,
From these calculations, we see that our initial assu mption regarding was correct: given two significant f igures, is
certainly negligible compared with 0.78 and 0.21. When can we make such an assumption? As a general rule, if is less than
about 5% of the total, or, then the assumption is j ustified. Otherwise, we must use the quadratic formula or
some other approach. The results we have obtained ag ree with the general observation that toxic, an ing redient of smog,
does not form from atmospheric concentrations of an d to a substantial degree at 25°C. We can verify ou r results by
substituting them into the original equilibrium equati on:
The final agrees with the value given at the beginning of t his example.
Under certain conditions, oxygen will react to form ozone, as sh own in the following equation:
with at 25°C. What ozone partial pressure is in equilibr ium with oxygen in the atmosphere ()?
Answer
Another type of problem that can be simplified by as suming that changes in concentration are negligible is one in which the
equilibrium constant is very large (). A large equi librium constant implies that the reactants are conv erted almost entirely to
products, so we can assume that the reaction proceeds 100% to completion. When we solve this type of proble m, we view the
system as equilibrating from the products side of th e reaction rather than the reactants side. This appr oach is illustrated in Example
The chemical equation for the reaction of hydrogen with ethylene () to give ethane () is as follows:
with at 25°C. If a mixture of 0.200 M and 0.155 M is ma intained at 25°C in the presence of a
powdered nickel catalyst, what is the equilibrium concentrat ion of each substance in the mixture?
Given: balanced chemical equation,, and initial concentrati ons of reactants
Asked for: equilibrium concentrations
Strategy:
A. Construct a table showing initial concentrations, conc entrations that would be present if the reaction were to go t o
completion, changes in concentrations, and final concen trations.
B. Write the equilibrium constant expression for the rea ction. Then substitute values from the table into the expr ession to solve
for (the change in concentration).Exercise
Example

7.1.4.11 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170056C. Calculate the equilibrium concentrations. Check you r answers by substituting these values into the equilibrium equation.
Solution:
A From the magnitude of the equilibrium constant, we se e that the reaction goes essentially to completion. Because the initial
concentration of ethylene (0.155 M) is less than the co ncentration of hydrogen (0.200 M), ethylene is the l imiting reactant; that
is, no more than 0.155 M ethane can be formed from 0.155 M ethylene. If the reaction were to go to completion, the
concentration of ethane would be 0.155 M and the conc entration of ethylene would be 0 M. Because the conce ntration of
hydrogen is greater than what is needed for complete reaction, the concentration of unreacted hydrogen in the reaction mixture
would be 0.200 M − 0.155 M = 0.045 M. The equilibrium con stant for the forward reaction is very large, so the equilibrium
constant for the reverse reaction must be very small. The problem then is identical to that in Example. If we define
as the change in the ethane concentration for the r everse reaction, then the change in the ethylene and hydrogen concentrations
is. The final equilibrium concentrations are the sums of the concentrations for the forward and reverse react ions.
IACE
Initial 0.200 0.155 0
Assuming 100% reaction 0.045 0 0.155
Change
Final
B Substituting values into the equilibrium constant expre ssion,
Once again, the magnitude of the equilibrium constan t tells us that the equilibrium will lie far to the ri ght as written, so the
reverse reaction is negligible. Thus is likely to be very small compared with either 0.155 M or 0.045 M, and the equation can
be simplified (= 0.045 and) as follows:
C The small value indicates that our assumption conce rning the reverse reaction is correct, and we can the refore calculate the
final concentrations by evaluating the expressions fr om the last line of the table:
We can verify our calculations by substituting the fin al concentrations into the equilibrium constant expression:
This value agrees with our initial value at the beginni ng of the example.
Hydrogen reacts with chlorine gas to form hydrogen chlor ide:Exercise

7.1.4.12 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170056with at 47°C. If a mixture of 0.257 M and 0.392 M is allowed to equilibrate at 47°C, what is the
equilibrium composition of the mixture?
Answer

Summary
Various methods can be used to solve the two fundament al types of equilibrium problems: (1) those in which we calculate the
concentrations of reactants and products at equilib rium and (2) those in which we use the equilibrium con stant and the initial
concentrations of reactants to determine the composi tion of the equilibrium mixture. When an equilibrium constant is calculated
from equilibrium concentrations, molar concentratio ns or partial pressures are substituted into the equi librium constant expression
for the reaction. Equilibrium constants can be used to calculate the equilibrium concentrations of reacta nts and products by using
the quantities or concentrations of the reactants, the stoichiometry of the balanced chemical equation for the reaction, and a tabular
format to obtain the final concentrations of all specie s at equilibrium.
7.1.4: Equilibrium Stoichiometry Calculations is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
LibreTexts.

7.1.5.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1700577.1.5: Applications of Equilibrium Constants
To predict in which direction a reaction will proceed.
We previously saw that knowing the magnitude of the e quilibrium constant under a given set of conditions allows chemists to
predict the extent of a reaction. Often, however, chemi sts must decide whether a system has reached equilibri um or if the
composition of the mixture will continue to change wit h time. In this section, we describe how to quantitativ ely analyze the
composition of a reaction mixture to make this determinat ion.
The Reaction Quotient
To determine whether a system has reached equilibrium, chemists use a Quantity called the reaction Quotient (Q). The expression
for the reaction Quotient has precisely the same for m as the equilibrium constant expression, except that may be derived from a
set of values measured at any time during the react ion of any mixture of the reactants and the product s, regardless of whether the
system is at equilibrium. Therefore, for the following gen eral reaction:
the reaction quotient is defined as follows:
To understand how information is obtained using a re action Quotient, consider the dissociation of dinitroge n tetroxide to nitrogen
dioxide,
for which at 298 K. We can write for this reaction as follo ws:
The following table lists data from three experiments i n which samples of the reaction mixture were obtained and analyzed at
equivalent time intervals, and the corresponding va lues of were calculated for each. Each experiment b egins with different
proportions of product and reactant:
Experiment
1 0 0.0400
2 0.0600 0
3 0.0200 0.0600
As these calculations demonstrate, can have any numeri cal value between 0 and infinity (undefined); that i s, can be greater
than, less than, or equal to K.
Comparing the magnitudes of and K enables us to dete rmine whether a reaction mixture is already at equil ibrium and, if it is not,
predict how its composition will change with time to re ach equilibrium (i.e., whether the reaction will proce ed to the right or to the
left as written). All you need to remember is that th e composition of a system not at equilibrium will cha nge in a way that makes
approach K. If, for example, then the system is alrea dy at equilibrium, and no further change in the com position of the
system will occur unless the conditions are changed. I f, then the ratio of the concentrations of products to the concentrations
of reactants is less than the ratio at equilibrium. T herefore, the reaction will proceed to the right as wr itten, forming products at the
expense of reactants. Conversely, if, then the rati o of the concentrations of products to the concentr ations of reactants isLearning Objectives

7.1.5.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170057greater than at equilibrium, so the reaction will pr oceed to the left as written, forming reactants at th e expense of products. These
points are illustrated graphically in Figure.
Figure: Two Different Ways of Illustrating How the Co mposition of a System Will Change Depending on the Re lative
Values of and K.(a) Both and K are plotted as point s along a number line: the system will always react in the way that causes
to approach K. (b) The change in the composition of a system with time is illustrated for systems with initia l values of,
, and.
If, the reaction will proceed to the right as written. If, the reaction wi ll
proceed to the left as written. If, then the system is at equilibrium.
At elevated temperatures, methane () reacts with water to produce hydrogen and carbon monoxide in what is kn own as a
steam-reforming reaction:
at 900 K. Huge amounts of hydrogen are produced from natural gas in this way and are then used for the
industrial synthesis of ammonia. If mol of, 8.0 × 10 mol of, mol of, and mol of
are placed in a 2.0 L steel reactor and heated to 9 00 K, will the reaction be at equilibrium or will it pr oceed to the right to
produce and or to the left to form and?
Given: balanced chemical equation, K, amounts of reactants an d products, and volume
Asked for: direction of reaction
Strategy:
A. Calculate the molar concentrations of the reactants a nd the products.
B. Use Equation to determine. Compare and to deter mine in which direction the reaction will proceed.
Solution:
A We must first find the initial concentrations of th e substances present. For example, we have of in a 2.0 L
container, so
We can calculate the other concentrations in a similar wa y:
, and
B We now compute and compare it with:Example
−3

7.1.5.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170057Because, we see that. Thus the ratio of the concent rations of products to the concentrations of reactant s
is less than the ratio for an equilibrium mixture. T he reaction will therefore proceed to the right as wr itten, forming and
at the expense of and.
In the water–gas shift reaction introduced in Example, carbon monoxide produced by steam-reforming react ion of
methane reacts with steam at elevated temperatures to prod uce more hydrogen:
at 900 K. If 0.010 mol of both and, 0.0080 mol of, and 0.012 mol of are injected into a 4.0 L reacto r
and heated to 900 K, will the reaction proceed to the left o r to the right as written?
Answer
. Since (Q > K), so the reaction will proceed to the left, and and will form.
Predicting the Direction of a Reaction with a Graph
By graphing a few equilibrium concentrations for a sy stem at a given temperature and pressure, we can readil y see the range of
reactant and product concentrations that correspond t o equilibrium conditions, for which. Such a graph al lows us to predict
what will happen to a reaction when conditions change so that no longer equals, such as when a reactant co ncentration or a
product concentration is increased or decreased.
Lead carbonate decomposes to lead oxide and carbon dioxid e according to the following equation:
Because and are solids, the equilibrium constant i s simply. At a given temperature, therefore, any syste m
that contains solid and solid will have exactly the same concentration of at equilibrium, regardless of the ratio or
the amounts of the solids present. This situation is r epresented in Figure, which shows a plot of versus th e amount of
added. Initially, the added decomposes completely to because the amount of is not sufficient to give a
concentration equal to. Thus the left portion of the graph represents a system that is not at equilibr ium because it contains
only CO2(g) and PbO(s). In contrast, when just enough has been added to give, the system has reached
equilibrium, and adding more has no effect on the concentration: the graph is a horizontal line. Thus a ny
concentration that is not on the horizontal line re presents a nonequilibrium state, and the system will adjust its composition to
achieve equilibrium, provided enough and are prese nt. For example, the point labeled A in Figure lies abo ve the
horizontal line, so it corresponds to a that is grea ter than the equilibrium concentration of (Q > K). To reach equilibrium,
the system must decrease, which it can do only by rea cting with solid to form solid. Thus the reaction in
Equation will proceed to the left as written, until. Conversely, the point labeled B in Figure lies bel ow the
horizontal line, so it corresponds to a that is less than the equilibrium concentration of (Q < K). To rea ch equilibrium,
the system must increase, which it can do only by d ecomposing solid to form and solid. The reaction in
Equation will therefore proceed to the right as written, until.Exercise

7.1.5.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170057
Figure: The Concentration of Gaseous in a Closed Syste m at Equilibrium as a Function of the Amount of Solid
Added. Initially the concentration of CO2(g) increa ses linearly with the amount of solid added, as decom poses to
CO2(g) and solid PbO. Once the concentration reaches the value that corresponds to the equilibrium concent ration, however,
adding more solid has no effect on, as long as the te mperature remains constant.
In contrast, the reduction of cadmium oxide by hydrogen g ives metallic cadmium and water vapor:
and the equilibrium constant K is. If is doubled at equilibrium, then [H2] must also be doubled for the system to
remain at equilibrium. A plot of versus at equilib rium is a straight line with a slope of K (Figure). Aga in, only
those pairs of concentrations of and that lie on the line correspond to equilibrium states. Any point representing a pair of
concentrations that does not lie on the line corresp onds to a nonequilibrium state. In such cases, the reacti on in Equation
will proceed in whichever direction causes the compos ition of the system to move toward the equilibrium li ne. For example, point
A in Figure lies below the line, indicating that the ratio is less than the ratio of an equilibrium mix ture (Q < K).
Thus the reaction in Equation will proceed to the r ight as written, consuming and producing, which causes the
concentration ratio to move up and to the left towar d the equilibrium line. Conversely, point B in Figure lies above the line,
indicating that the ratio is greater than the ratio of an equilibrium mixture (Q > K). Thus the reaction in Equation
will proceed to the left as written, consuming and pr oducing, which causes the concentration ratio to move down
and to the right toward the equilibrium line.
Figure: The Concentration of Water Vapor versus the C oncentration of Hydrogen for the
System at Equilibrium. For any equilibrium concentrati on of, there is only one equilibrium concentration of. Because
the magnitudes of the two concentrations are directly proportional, a large at equilibrium requires a la rge and vice versa.
In this case, the slope of the line is equal to K.
In another example, solid ammonium iodide dissociates to gaseous ammonia and hydrogen iodide at elevated tempera tures:
For this system, is equal to the product of the conce ntrations of the two products:. If we double the conc entration of
NH3, the concentration of HI must decrease by approximat ely a factor of 2 to maintain equilibrium, as shown i n Figure. As

7.1.5.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170057a result, for a given concentration of either or, o nly a single equilibrium composition that contains e qual concentrations of
both and HI is possible, for which. Any point that lies below and to the left of the equilibrium curve
(such as point A in Figure) corresponds to, and the reaction in Equation will therefore proceed to the right as
written, causing the composition of the system to move toward the equilibrium line. Conversely, any point th at lies above and to the
right of the equilibrium curve (such as point B in Figure) corresponds to, and the reaction in Equatio n will
therefore proceed to the left as written, again caus ing the composition of the system to move toward the equilibrium line. By
graphing equilibrium concentrations for a given syst em at a given temperature and pressure, we can predict the direction of reaction
of that mixture when the system is not at equilibrium.
Figure: The Concentration of versus the Concentratio n of for the System at
Equilibrium. Only one equilibrium concentration of is possible for any given equilibrium concentration o f HI(g). In this
case, the two are inversely proportional. Thus a large at equilibrium requires a small at equilibrium and vice versa.
Summary
The reaction Quotient (Q) is used to determine whether a system is at equilibrium and if it is not, to pre dict the direction of
reaction. The reaction Quotient (or) has the same f orm as the equilibrium constant expression, but it is derived from
concentrations obtained at any time. When a reactio n system is at equilibrium,. Graphs derived by plott ing a few
equilibrium concentrations for a system at a given t emperature and pressure can be used to predict the di rection in which a reaction
will proceed. Points that do not lie on the line or c urve represent nonequilibrium states, and the system wi ll adjust, if it can, to
achieve equilibrium.
7.1.5: Applications of Equilibrium Constants is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
LibreTexts.

7.1.6.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1700587.1.6: Le Chatelier's Principle
Describe the ways in which an equilibrium system can be stresse d
Predict the response of a stressed equilibrium using Le Chate lier’s principle
As we saw in the previous section, reactions proceed in both directions (reactants go to products and produc ts go to reactants). We
can tell a reaction is at equilibrium if the reacti on quotient () is equal to the equilibrium constant (). We next address what
happens when a system at equilibrium is disturbed so th at is no longer equal to. If a system at equilibri um is subjected to a
perturbance or stress (such as a change in concentr ation) the position of equilibrium changes. Since this stress affects the
concentrations of the reactants and the products, th e value of will no longer equal the value of. To r e-establish equilibrium, the
system will either shift toward the products (if or t he reactants (if until returns to the same value a s. This
process is described by Le Chatelier's principle.
When a chemical system at equilibrium is disturbed, it returns to equilibrium by counteracting the distu rbance. As described in
the previous paragraph, the disturbance causes a chan ge in; the reaction will shift to re-establish.
Predicting the Direction of a Reversible Reaction
Le Chatelier's principle can be used to predict cha nges in equilibrium concentrations when a system tha t is at equilibrium is
subjected to a stress. However, if we have a mixture of reactants and products that have not yet reached eq uilibrium, the changes
necessary to reach equilibrium may not be so obvious. In such a case, we can compare the values of and for the system to
predict the changes.
A chemical system at equilibrium can be temporarily shifted out of equilibrium by adding
or removing one or more of the reactants or products. The concentrations of both
reactants and products then undergo additional changes to return the system to
equilibrium.
The stress on the system in Figure is the reduction o f the equilibrium concentration of SCN (lowering the concentration of
one of the reactants would cause to be larger than K). As a consequence, Le Chatelier's principle leads us to predict that the
concentration of Fe(SCN) should decrease, increasing t he concentration of SCN part way back to its original concentration, and
increasing the concentration of Fe above its initial equ ilibrium concentration.
Figure: (a) The test tube contains 0.1 M Fe. (b) Thiocyanate ion ha s been added to solution in (a), forming the red
Fe(SCN) ion.. (c) Silver nitrate has been added to the soluti on in (b), precipitating some
of the SCN− as the white solid AgSCN.. The decrease in t he SCN− concentration shifts the first
equilibrium in the solution to the left, decreasing the conce ntration (and lightening color) of the Fe(SCN). (credit: modification
of work by Mark Ott).Learning Objectives
Le Chatelier's principle
2+ −
3+
3+
2+
2+

7.1.6.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170058The effect of a change in concentration on a system at equilibrium is illustrated further by the equilibrium o f this chemical reaction:
The numeric values for this example have been determ ined experimentally. A mixture of gases at 400 °C wit h
and is at equilibrium; for this mixture,. If is i ntroduced into the system so quickly that its
concentration doubles before it begins to react (ne w), the reaction will shift so that a new equilibrium i s reached, at
which
, and
This gives:
We have stressed this system by introducing addition al. The stress is relieved when the reaction shifts t o the right, using up
some (but not all) of the excess, reducing the amount of unc ombined, and forming additional.
Effect of Change in Pressure on Equilibrium
Sometimes we can change the position of equilibrium by changing the pressure of a system. However, changes in p ressure have a
measurable effect only in systems in which gases are in volved, and then only when the chemical reaction prod uces a change in the
total number of gas molecules in the system. An easy wa y to recognize such a system is to look for differen t numbers of moles of
gas on the reactant and product sides of the equilib rium. While evaluating pressure (as well as related f actors like volume), it is
important to remember that equilibrium constants are defined with regard to concentration (for K) or partial pressure (for K).
Some changes to total pressure, like adding an inert gas that is not part of the equilibrium, will change the total pressure but not the
partial pressures of the gases in the equilibrium const ant expression. Thus, addition of a gas not involved i n the equilibrium will not
perturb the equilibrium.
As we increase the pressure of a gaseous system at equilibrium, eit her by decreasing the volume of the system or by adding more of
one of the components of the equilibrium mixture, we introduce a stress by increasing the partial pressures of one or more of the
components. In accordance with Le Chatelier's principl e, a shift in the equilibrium that reduces the tota l number of molecules per
unit of volume will be favored because this relieves the st ress. The reverse reaction would be favored by a decrease i n pressure.
Consider what happens when we increase the pressure on a system in which,, and are at equilibrium:
The formation of additional amounts of decreases t he total number of molecules in the system because e ach time two
molecules of form, a total of three molecules of a nd are consumed. This reduces the total pressure exert ed by the
system and reduces, but does not completely relieve, th e stress of the increased pressure. On the other hand, a decrease in the
pressure on the system favors decomposition of into an d, which tends to restore the pressure.
Now consider this reaction:
Because there is no change in the total number of mo lecules in the system during reaction, a change in p ressure does not favor
either formation or decomposition of gaseous nitrogen m onoxide.c P

7.1.6.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170058Effect of Change in Temperature on Equilibrium
Changing concentration or pressure perturbs an equi librium because the reaction quotient is shifted away from the equilibrium
value. Changing the temperature of a system at equili brium has a different effect: A change in temperatur e actually changes the
value of the equilibrium constant. However, we can qua litatively predict the effect of the temperature ch ange by treating it as a
stress on the system and applying Le Chatelier's principl e.
When hydrogen reacts with gaseous iodine, heat is evolve d.
Because this reaction is exothermic, we can write it with heat as a product.
Increasing the temperature of the reaction increase s the internal energy of the system. Thus, increasi ng the temperature has the
effect of increasing the amount of one of the produc ts of this reaction. The reaction shifts to the left t o relieve the stress, and there is
an increase in the concentration of H and I and a r eduction in the concentration of HI. Lowering the temp erature of this system
reduces the amount of energy present, favors the product ion of heat, and favors the formation of hydrogen iodide.
When we change the temperature of a system at equili brium, the equilibrium constant for the reaction cha nges. Lowering the
temperature in the HI system increases the equilibriu m constant: At the new equilibrium the concentration of HI has increased and
the concentrations of H and I decreased. Raising the temperature decreases the value of the equilibrium constant, from 67.5 at
357 °C to 50.0 at 400 °C.
Temperature affects the equilibrium between and in th is reaction
The positive ΔH value tells us that the reaction is endot hermic and could be written
At higher temperatures, the gas mixture has a deep b rown color, indicative of a significant amount of br own molecules. If,
however, we put a stress on the system by cooling the mix ture (withdrawing energy), the equilibrium shifts to the left to supply
some of the energy lost by cooling. The concentratio n of colorless increases, and the concentration of brown decreases,
causing the brown color to fade.
The overview of how different disturbances affect the rea ction equlibrium properties is tabulated in Table.
Table: Effects of Disturbances of Equilibrium and K2 2
2 2

7.1.6.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170058DisturbanceObserved Change as
Equilibrium is RestoredDirection of Shift Effect on K
reactant addedadded reactant is partially
consumedtoward products none
product addedadded product is partially
consumedtoward reactants none
decrease in volume/increase in
gas pressurepressure decreasestoward side with fewer moles
of gasnone
increase in volume/decrease in
gas pressurepressure increasestoward side with more moles of
gasnone
temperature increase heat is absorbedtoward products for
endothermic, toward reactants
for exothermicchanges
temperature decrease heat is given offtoward reactants for
endothermic, toward products
for exothermicchanges
Write an equilibrium constant expression for each rea ction and use this expression to predict what will hap pen to the
concentration of the substance in bold when the indicated c hange is made if the system is to maintain equilibrium.
a.: the amount of HgO is doubled.
b.: the concentration of is tripled.
c.: the concentration of isobutane is halved.
Given: equilibrium systems and changes
Asked for: equilibrium constant expressions and effects of change s
Strategy:
Write the equilibrium constant expression, rememberi ng that pure liquids and solids do not appear in th e expression. From this
expression, predict the change that must occur to maintai n equilibrium when the indicated changes are made.
Solution:
Because and are pure substances, they do not appea r in the equilibrium constant expression. Thus, for th is
reaction,. The equilibrium concentration of is a constant and does not depend on the amount of presen t.
Hence adding more will not affect the equilibrium conce ntration of, so no compensatory change is necessary.
does not appear in the equilibrium constant express ion because it is a solid. Thus, which means that
the concentrations of the products are inversely prop ortional. If adding triples the concentration, for example, then
the concentration must decrease by about a factor of 3 for the system to remain at equilibrium so that the product of the
concentrations equals.
For this reaction,, so halving the concentration of isobutane means that the n-butane concentration mus t also
decrease by about half if the system is to maintain equilib rium.
Write an equilibrium constant expression for each reac tion. What must happen to the concentration of the sub stance in bold
when the indicated change occurs if the system is to maintain equilibrium?
a.: the concentration of is decreased by a factor of 3.Example
Exercise

7.1.6.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170058b.: the amount of is tripled.
c.: the concentration of is doubled.
Answer a
; must decrease by about a factor of 3.
Answer b
; solid lithium does not appear in the equilibrium constan t expression, so no compensatory change is necessary.
Answer c
; must decrease by about half.
Catalysts Do Not Affect Equilibrium
As we learned during our study of kinetics, a catalyst can speed up the rate of a reaction. Though this inc rease in reaction rate may
cause a system to reach equilibrium more quickly (by speeding up the forward and reverse reactions), a catal yst has no effect on the
value of an equilibrium constant nor on equilibrium concentrations. The interplay of changes in concentr ation or pressure,
temperature, and the lack of an influence of a catal yst on a chemical equilibrium is illustrated in the industrial synthesis of
ammonia from nitrogen and hydrogen according to the equation
A large quantity of ammonia is manufactured by this reaction. Each year, ammonia is among the top 10 chem icals, by mass,
manufactured in the world. About 2 billion pounds are m anufactured in the United States each year. Ammonia pl ays a vital role in
our global economy. It is used in the production of fertilizers and is, itself, an important fertilizer for the growth of corn, cotton, and
other crops. Large quantities of ammonia are converte d to nitric acid, which plays an important role in th e production of fertilizers,
explosives, plastics, dyes, and fibers, and is also used in t he steel industry.
Haber was born in Breslau, Prussia (presently Wroclaw, Pola nd) in December 1868. He went on to study chemistry an d, while
at the University of Karlsruhe, he developed what would later be known as the Haber process: the catalytic for mation of
ammonia from hydrogen and atmospheric nitrogen unde r high temperatures and pressures. For this work, Haber wa s awarded
the 1918 Nobel Prize in Chemistry for synthesis of am monia from its elements (Equation). The Haber process was a
boon to agriculture, as it allowed the production of fertilizers to no longer be dependent on mined feed stocks such as sodium
nitrate.
Figure: The work of Nobel Prize recipient Fritz Haber revolut ionized agricultural practices in the early 20th century. His
work also affected wartime strategies, adding chemical we apons to the artillery.
Currently, the annual production of synthetic nitrog en fertilizers exceeds 100 million tons and synthetic fertilizer production
has increased the number of humans that arable land can support from 1.9 persons per hectare in 1908 to 4.3 in 2008. The
availability of nitrogen is a strong limiting factor to the growth of plants. Despite accounting for 78% o f air, diatomic nitrogen (
) is nutritionally unavailable to a majority of pla nts due the tremendous stability of the nitrogen-nit rogen triple bond.Fritz Haber

7.1.6.6 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170058Therefore, the nitrogen must be converted to a more b ioavailable form (this conversion is called nitrogen fixation). Legumes
achieve this conversion at ambient temperature by expl oiting bacteria equipped with suitable enzymes.
In addition to his work in ammonia production, Haber i s also remembered by history as one of the fathers of chemical warfare.
During World War I, he played a major role in the de velopment of poisonous gases used for trench warfare. R egarding his role
in these developments, Haber said, “During peace time a scientist belongs to the World, but during war tim e he belongs to his
country.” Haber defended the use of gas warfare again st accusations that it was inhumane, saying that death was death, by
whatever means it was inflicted. He stands as an exampl e of the ethical dilemmas that face scientists in tim es of war and the
double-edged nature of the sword of science.
Like Haber, the products made from ammonia can be mul tifaceted. In addition to their value for agricultu re, nitrogen
compounds can also be used to achieve destructive end s. Ammonium nitrate has also been used in explosives, in cluding
improvised explosive devices. Ammonium nitrate was one of the components of the bomb used in the attack on the Alfred P.
Murrah Federal Building in downtown Oklahoma City on April 19, 1995.
Summary
Systems at equilibrium can be disturbed by changes to temperature, concentration, and, in some cases, volume a nd pressure;
volume and pressure changes will disturb equilibrium i f the number of moles of gas is different on the rea ctant and product sides of
the reaction. The system's response to these disturba nces is described by Le Chatelier's principle: The s ystem will respond in a way
that counteracts the disturbance. Not all changes to the system result in a disturbance of the equilibri um. Adding a catalyst affects
the rates of the reactions but does not alter the eq uilibrium, and changing pressure or volume will not sign ificantly disturb systems
with no gases or with equal numbers of moles of gas on the reac tant and product side.
Footnotes
1. 1 Herrlich, P. “The Responsibility of the Scientist: Wh at Can History Teach Us About How Scientists Should Handle Re search
That Has the Potential to Create Harm?” EMBO Reports 14 (2013): 759–764.
Glossary
Le Chatelier's principle
when a chemical system at equilibrium is disturbed, it returns to equilibrium by counteracting the disturban ce
position of equilibrium
concentrations or partial pressures of components of a r eaction at equilibrium (commonly used to describe cond itions before a
disturbance)
stress
change to a reaction's conditions that may cause a shift in the equilibrium
Contributors and Attributions
Paul Flowers (University of North Carolina - Pembroke), Kla us Theopold (University of Delaware) and Richard Langl ey
(Stephen F. Austin State University) with contributing au thors. Textbook content produced by OpenStax College i s licensed
under a Creative Commons Attribution License 4.0 license. Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/85abf1932bd...a7ac8df6@9.110).
7.1.6: Le Chatelier's Principle is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.1

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
7.2: Introduction to Acid–Base Equilibria
Acids and bases have been defined differently by three sets of theories. One is the Arrhenius definition, which revolves around the
idea that acids are substances that ionize (break of f) in an aqueous solution to produce hydrogen (H) io ns while bases produce
hydroxide (OH) ions in solution. On the other hand, t he Bronsted-Lowry definition defines acids as substance s that donate protons
(H) whereas bases are substances that accept protons. Also, the Lewis theory of acids and bases states that acids are electron pair
acceptors while bases are electron pair donors. Acids and base s can be defined by their physical and chemical observ ations.
7.2.1: Brønsted–Lowry Acids and Bases
7.2.2: Autoionization of Water
7.2.3: pH and pOH
7.2.4: Acid Strength
7.2: Introduction to Acid–Base Equilibria is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.+

7.2.1.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1951547.2.1: Brønsted–Lowry Acids and Bases
Identify acids, bases, and conjugate acid-base pairs accor ding to the Brønsted-Lowry definition
Write equations for acid and base ionization reactions
Describe the acid-base behavior of amphiprotic substan ces
Understand acid-base reactivity as a proton transfer proc ess.
In previous chapters, we have understood acids and bas es in terms of the Arrhenius definition: an acid is a compound that dissolves
in water to yield hydronium ions () and a base is a compound that dissolves in water to yield hydroxide i ons (). This
definition is not wrong; it is simply limited. In this chapter, we will extend the definition of an acid or a base using the more general
definition proposed in 1923 by the Danish chemist Jo hannes Brønsted and the English chemist Thomas Lowry. Th eir definition
centers on the proton,. A proton is what remains when a normal hydrogen atom,, loses an electron. A compou nd that donates
a proton to another compound is called a Brønsted-L owry acid, and a compound that accepts a proton is ca lled a Brønsted-Lowry
base.
Table: Definitions of Acids and Bases
Definition Acid Base
Arrhenius donor donor
Brønsted–Lowry donor acceptor
Brønsted-Lowry Acids
Brønsted-Lowry acids may be neutral molecules such as,, or acetic acid (). Anions (such as,,
, and) and cations (such as,, and) may also act as acids. In general, we can symbolize any
acid as and describe the donation of a proton to a water mo lecule as follows:
We call the product,, that remains after an acid do nates a proton the conjugate base of the acid. In the generalized example
above, the anion () is the conjugate base of the ac id (). This species is called a base because it can accep t a proton (to re-form
the original acid).
The reaction between a Brønsted-Lowry acid and water i s called acid ionization. For example, when hydrogen fluoride dissolves
in water and ionizes, protons are donated from hydroge n fluoride molecules to water molecules, yielding hydr onium ions and
fluoride ions:
The fluoride ion () is the conjugate base of hydrofluo ric acid (). Here are several other examples of acid ionizat ion in water:
In each case, the acid ionization process results in the formation of the conjugate base! Identifying acid-base conjugate pairs will
help you understand acid-base reactivity.Learning Objectives

7.2.1.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/195154Identify the conjugate base for each of the following acids:
a) acetic acid ()
b) hydrocyanic acid ()
c) phosphoric acid ()
Solution
a)
b)
c)
Brønsted-Lowry Bases
Brønsted-Lowry bases may, likewise, be neutral molecule s (such as and), anions (such as,,,,
, and), or cations (such as). The most familiar bas es are ionic compounds such as and,
which contain the hydroxide ion,.
When we add a base to water, a base ionization reaction occurs in which a proton is transferred from a water mo lecule and accepted
by the base molecule (or ion). For example, adding am monia to water yields hydroxide ions and ammonium io ns. We call the
product that results when a base accepts a proton the base’s conjugate acid. This species is an acid because it can give up a pr oton
(and thus re-form the base).
Notice that both these ionization reactions are repre sented as equilibrium processes. The relative extent to which these acid and
base ionization reactions proceed is an important topi c treated in a later section of this chapter.
Acid-Base Reactions
Acid-base reactivity under the Brønsted-Lowry definiti on can be considered a proton transfer process. In this process the proton
is transferred from the acid to the base. Consider the fo llowing reaction between hydrocyanic acid () and ammonia ():
Write and equation for the reaction that would occur betwee n hydrocyanic acid () and ammonia ().
Solution
This is a proton transfer reaction. The acid will donate a proton and the base will accept a proton.
Amphiprotic Species
Many molecules and ions may either gain or lose a pro ton under the appropriate conditions. Such species are said to be
amphiprotic. Another term used to describe such speci es is amphoteric, which is a more general term for a sp ecies that may actExample: Conjugate Acid-Base Pairs
Example: Acid-Base Reaction (Proton Transfer)

7.2.1.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/195154either as an acid or a base by any definition (not j ust the Brønsted-Lowry one). Consider for example th e bicarbonate ion, which
may either donate or accept a proton as shown here:
Write separate equations representing the ionization i n water of
a. as an acid
b. as a base
Solution
a.
b.
Write separate equations representing the reaction of
a. as a base with HBr
b. as an acid with
Answer a
Answer b
In the preceding paragraphs we saw that water can function a s either an acid or a base, depending on the nature of the solute
dissolved in it. The amphoprotic nature of water plays a ce ntral role in aqueous acid-base reactivity and will be discu ssed further in
the next section.
Summary
A compound that can donate a proton (a hydrogen ion) to another compound is called a Brønsted-Lowry aci d. The compound that
accepts the proton is called a Brønsted-Lowry base. The species remaining after a Brønsted-Lowry acid has lost a proton is the
conjugate base of the acid. The species formed when a Brønsted-Lowry base gains a proton is the conjugate aci d of the base. Thus,
an acid-base reaction occurs when a proton is transf erred from an acid to a base, with formation of the c onjugate base of the
reactant acid and formation of the conjugate acid o f the reactant base. Amphiprotic species can act as bot h proton donors and
proton acceptors. Water is an important amphiprotic specie s.
Glossary
acid ionization
reaction involving the transfer of a proton from an acid to water, yielding hydronium ions and the conjugate base of the acid
amphiprotic
species that may either gain or lose a proton in a reac tion
amphoteric
species that can act as either an acid or a base
base ionizationExample: The Acid-Base Behavior of an AmphoPROTIC Substance
Exercise

7.2.1.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/195154reaction involving the transfer of a proton from water to a base, yielding hydroxide ions and the conjugate aci d of the base
Brønsted-Lowry acid
proton donor
Brønsted-Lowry base
proton acceptor
conjugate acid
substance formed when a base gains a proton
conjugate base
substance formed when an acid loses a proton
Contributors and Attributions
Paul Flowers (University of North Carolina - Pembroke), Kla us Theopold (University of Delaware) and Richard Langl ey
(Stephen F. Austin State University) with contributing au thors. Textbook content produced by OpenStax College i s licensed
under a Creative Commons Attribution License 4.0 license. Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/85abf1932bd...a7ac8df6@9.110).
7.2.1: Brønsted–Lowry Acids and Bases is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

7.2.2.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1700637.2.2: Autoionization of Water
Use the ion-product constant for water to calculate hydr onium and hydroxide ion concentrations
In the preceding section we saw that water is an amphipr otic substance. It can function as either an acid or a base, depending on the
nature of the solute dissolved in it. In fact, in pur e water or in any aqueous solution, water acts both a s an acid and a base. A very
small fraction of water molecules donate protons to oth er water molecules to form hydronium ions and hydroxide io ns:
This type of reaction, in which a substance ionizes when one molecule of the substance reacts with another m olecule of the same
substance, is referred to as autoionization. Pure water undergoes autoionization to a very slight extent. Only about two out of
every molecules in a sample of pure water are ionize d at 25 °C. The equilibrium constant for the ionizat ion of water is called
the ion-product constant for water (K):
The slight ionization of pure water is reflected in the small value of the equilibrium constant; at 25 °C, K has a value of
. The process is endothermic, and so the extent of i onization and the resulting concentrations of hydro nium ion and
hydroxide ion increase with temperature. For example, at 100 °C, the value for is approximately, roughly 100-times
larger than the value at 25 °C.
What are the hydronium ion concentration and the hydroxid e ion concentration in pure water at 25 °C?
Solution
The autoionization of water yields the same number of hydronium and hydroxide ions. Therefore, in pure wate r,
. At 25 °C:
So:
The hydronium ion concentration and the hydroxide i on concentration are the same, and we find that both equa l.
The ion product of water at 80 °C is. What are the concentrations of hydronium and hydroxide ions in pu re water at 80
°C?
Answer
It is important to realize that the autoionization e quilibrium for water is established in all aqueous so lutions. Adding an acid or base
to water will not change the value of the equilibrium constant. The following example demonstrates the qua ntitative aspects of this
relation between hydronium and hydroxide ion concentrat ions in an aqueous solution.Learning Objectives
w
w
Example: Ion Concentrations in Pure Water
Exercise

7.2.2.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170063A solution of carbon dioxide in water has a hydronium ion concentration of. What is the concentration of
hydroxide ion at 25 °C?
Solution
We know the value of the ion-product constant for water at 25 °C:
Thus, we can calculate the missing equilibrium concentrat ion.
Rearrangement of the K expression yields that is directly proportional to the inverse of [H O]:
The hydroxide ion concentration in water is reduced t o as the hydrogen ion concentration increases to
. This is expected from Le Chatelier’s principle; th e autoionization reaction shifts to the left to red uce the stress of the
increased hydronium ion concentration and the is reduc ed relative to that in pure water.
A check of these concentrations confirms that our ari thmetic is correct:
What is the hydronium ion concentration in an aqueous s olution with a hydroxide ion concentration of 0.001 M at 25 °C?
Answer
Summary
Water is an important amphiprotic species. It can form both the hydronium ion, H O, and the hydroxide ion, when it
undergoes autoionization:
The ion product of water, K is the equilibrium constant for the autoionization r eaction:
{Key Equations
Glossary
autoionization
reaction between identical species yielding ionic product s; for water, this reaction involves transfer of protons t o yield
hydronium and hydroxide ions
ion-product constant for water (K)
equilibrium constant for the autoionization of waterExample: The Inverse Proportionality of and
w 3+
Exercise
3+
w
w

7.2.2.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170063Contributors and Attributions
Paul Flowers (University of North Carolina - Pembroke), Kla us Theopold (University of Delaware) and Richard Langl ey
(Stephen F. Austin State University) with contributing au thors. Textbook content produced by OpenStax College i s licensed
under a Creative Commons Attribution License 4.0 license. Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/85abf1932bd...a7ac8df6@9.110).
7.2.2: Autoionization of Water is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

7.2.3.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1951587.2.3: pH and pOH
Explain the characterization of aqueous solutions as acid ic, basic, or neutral
Express hydronium and hydroxide ion concentrations on the pH and pOH scales
Perform calculations relating pH and pOH
As discussed earlier, hydronium and hydroxide ions are present both in pure water and in all aqueous solutio ns, and their
concentrations are inversely proportional as determi ned by the ion product of water (K). The concentrations of these ions in a
solution are often critical determinants of the sol ution’s properties and the chemical behaviors of its other solutes, and specific
vocabulary has been developed to describe these conce ntrations in relative terms. A solution is neutral if it contains equal
concentrations of hydronium and hydroxide ions; aci dic if it contains a greater concentration of hydro nium ions than hydroxide
ions; and basic if it contains a lesser concentration of hy dronium ions than hydroxide ions.
A common means of expressing quantities, the values of which may span many orders of magnitude, is to use a l ogarithmic scale.
One such scale that is very popular for chemical conc entrations and equilibrium constants is based on the p-function, defined as
shown where “X” is the quantity of interest and “log” is the b ase-10 logarithm:
The pH of a solution is therefore defined as shown here, whe re [H O] is the molar concentration of hydronium ion in the solution:
Rearranging this equation to isolate the hydronium ion mola rity yields the equivalent expression:
Likewise, the hydroxide ion molarity may be expressed as a p-function, or pOH:
or
Finally, the relation between these two ion concentration ex pressed as p-functions is easily derived from the expre ssion:
At 25 °C, the value of is, and so:
The hydronium ion molarity in pure water (or any neu tral solution) is at 25 °C. The pH and pOH of a neutra l solution
at this temperature are therefore:
And so, at this temperature, acidic solutions are those with hydronium ion molarities greater than and hyd roxide ion
molarities less than (corresponding to pH values le ss than 7.00 and pOH values greater than 7.00). Basic s olutions are
those with hydronium ion molarities less than and hyd roxide ion molarities greater than (corresponding
to pH values greater than 7.00 and pOH values less than 7.0 0).
Table: Summary of Relations for Acidic, Basic and Neu tral SolutionsLearning Objectives
w
3+

7.2.3.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/195158Classification Relative Ion Concentrations pH at 25 °C
acidic [H O] > [OH] pH < 7
neutral [H O] = [OH] pH = 7
basic [H O] < [OH] pH > 7
Figure shows the relationships between [H O], [OH], pH, and pOH, and gives values for these properties at standard
temperatures for some common substances.
Figure: The pH and pOH scales represent concentrations of [H O] and OH, respectively. The pH and pOH values o f some
common substances at standard temperature (25 °C) are sh own in this chart.
What is the pH of stomach acid, a solution of HCl with a hydr onium ion concentration of?
Solution
Water exposed to air contains carbonic acid, H CO, due to th e reaction between carbon dioxide and water:
Air-saturated water has a hydronium ion concentration caused by the dissolved of, about 20-times larger t han
that of pure water. Calculate the pH of the solution at 25 °C.
Answer3+ −
3+ −
3+ −
3+ −
3+ −
Example: Calculation of pH from
Exercise
2 3

7.2.3.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1951585.70
Calculate the hydronium ion concentration of blood, th e pH of which is 7.3 (slightly alkaline).
Solution
or
(On a calculator take the antilog, or the “inverse” log, of − 7.3, or calculate 10.)
Calculate the hydronium ion concentration of a soluti on with a pH of −1.07.
Answer
12 M
Since the autoionization constant is temperature de pendent, these correlations between pH values and the
acidic/neutral/basic adjectives will be different at temperatures other than 25 °C. For example, the hydro nium molarity of pure
water at 80 °C is 4.9 × 10 M, which corresponds to pH and pOH values of:
At this temperature, then, neutral solutions exhibit pH = pOH = 6.31, acidic solutions exhibit pH less than 6.31 and pOH
greater than 6.31, whereas basic solutions exhibit pH g reater than 6.31 and pOH less than 6.31. This distinctio n can be
important when studying certain processes that occur a t nonstandard temperatures, such as enzyme reactions i n warm-blooded
organisms. Unless otherwise noted, references to pH values are presumed to be those at standard temperature (2 5 °C) (Table
It is common that the pH scale is argued to range from 0-14 or perhaps 1-14, but neither is correct. The pH range does not have
an upper nor lower bound, since as defined above, the pH is an indication of concentration of H. For exampl e, at a pH of zero
the hydronium ion concentration is one molar, while a t pH 14 the hydroxide ion concentration is one molar. Typically the
concentrations of H in water in most solutions fall b etween a range of 1 M (pH=0) and 10 M (pH=14). Hence a ra nge of 0Example: Calculation of Hydronium Ion Concentration from pH
−7.3
Exercise
"Neutral" doesn't always mean!
−7
THE PH SCALE DOES NOT HAVE UPPER NOR LOWER BOUNDS!
+ -14

7.2.3.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/195158to 14 provides sensible (but not absolute) "bookends" for the scale. One can go somewhat below zero and somewhat above 14
in water, because the concentrations of hydronium ions or hyd roxide ions can exceed one molar.
Environmental Science
Normal rainwater has a pH between 5 and 6 due to the presence o f dissolved CO which forms carbonic acid:
Acid rain is rainwater that has a pH of less than 5, du e to a variety of nonmetal oxides, including CO, SO, SO, NO, and NO
being dissolved in the water and reacting with it to f orm not only carbonic acid, but sulfuric acid and n itric acid. The formation and
subsequent ionization of sulfuric acid are shown here:
Carbon dioxide is naturally present in the atmosphere because we and most other organisms produce it as a waste product of
metabolism. Carbon dioxide is also formed when fires r elease carbon stored in vegetation or when we burn wood or fossil fuels.
Sulfur trioxide in the atmosphere is naturally produce d by volcanic activity, but it also stems from burni ng fossil fuels, which have
traces of sulfur, and from the process of “roasting” ores of metal sulfides in metal-refining processes. Oxi des of nitrogen are
formed in internal combustion engines where the high temperatures make it possible for the nitrogen and oxygen in air to
chemically combine.
Acid rain is a particular problem in industrial areas where the products of combustion and smelting are relea sed into the air without
being stripped of sulfur and nitrogen oxides. In North America and Europe until the 1980s, it was responsibl e for the destruction of
forests and freshwater lakes, when the acidity of the rain actually killed trees, damaged soil, and made la kes uninhabitable for all
but the most acid-tolerant species. Acid rain also c orrodes statuary and building facades that are made of marble and limestone
(Figure). Regulations limiting the amount of sulfur and nitrogen oxides that can be released into the at mosphere by industry
and automobiles have reduced the severity of acid da mage to both natural and manmade environments in Nor th America and
Europe. It is now a growing problem in industrial areas o f China and India.
Figure: (a) Acid rain makes trees more susceptible to d rought and insect infestation, and depletes nutrients i n the soil. (b) It
also is corrodes statues that are carved from marble or limestone. (credit a: modification of work by Chris M Morris; credit b:
modification of work by “Eden, Janine and Jim”/Flickr)
What are the pOH and the pH of a 0.0125-M solution of potassium hydroxide, KOH?
Solution
Potassium hydroxide is a highly soluble ionic compoun d and completely dissociates when dissolved in dilute solution, yielding
[OH] = 0.0125 M:
The pH can be found from the:2
2 2 3 2
Example: Calculation of pOH

7.2.3.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/195158The hydronium ion concentration of vinegar is approxim ately. What are the corresponding values of pOH and pH?
Answer
pOH = 11.6,
pH = 14.00 - pOH = 2.4
The acidity of a solution is typically assessed expe rimentally by measurement of its pH. The pOH of a soluti on is not usually
measured, as it is easily calculated from an experime ntally determined pH value. The pH of a solution can be directly measured
using a pH meter (Figure).
Figure: (a) A research-grade pH meter used in a labor atory can have a resolution of 0.001 pH units, an acc uracy of ± 0.002
pH units, and may cost in excess of $1000. (b) A portab le pH meter has lower resolution (0.01 pH units), lowe r accuracy (± 0.2 pH
units), and a far lower price tag. (credit b: modifi cation of work by Jacopo Werther)
The pH of a solution may also be visually estimated using c olored indicators (Figure).
Figure: (a) A universal indicator assumes a different c olor in solutions of different pH values. Thus, it can be added to a
solution to determine the pH of the solution. The eig ht vials each contain a universal indicator and 0.1-M solutions of progressively
weaker acids: HCl (pH = l), CH CO H (pH = 3), and NH Cl (pH = 5), deionized water, a neutral substance (pH = 7); and 0.1-M
solutions of the progressively stronger bases: KCl (pH = 7), aniline, C H NH (pH = 9), NH (pH = 11), and NaOH (pH = 13). (b)
pH paper contains a mixture of indicators that give d ifferent colors in solutions of differing pH values. (c redit: modification of
work by Sahar Atwa).
Summary
The concentration of hydronium ion in a solution of an acid in water is greater than at 25 °C. The con centration of
hydroxide ion in a solution of a base in water is grea ter than at 25 °C. The concentration of H O in a sol ution can be
expressed as the pH of the solution;. The concentrat ion of OH can be expressed as the pOH of the solution:
. In pure water, pH = 7.00 and pOH = 7.00
Key EquationsExercise
3 2 4
6 5 2 3
3+

7.2.3.6 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/195158[H O] = 10
[OH] = 10
pH + pOH = p K = 14.00 at 25 °C
Glossary
acidic
describes a solution in which [H O] > [OH]
basic
describes a solution in which [H O] < [OH]
neutral
describes a solution in which [H O] = [OH]
pH
logarithmic measure of the concentration of hydronium i ons in a solution
pOH
logarithmic measure of the concentration of hydroxide i ons in a solution
Contributors and Attributions
Paul Flowers (University of North Carolina - Pembroke), Kla us Theopold (University of Delaware) and Richard Langl ey
(Stephen F. Austin State University) with contributing au thors. Textbook content produced by OpenStax College i s licensed
under a Creative Commons Attribution License 4.0 license. Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/85abf1932bd...a7ac8df6@9.110).
This page titled 7.2.3: pH and pOH is shared under a CC BY license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by OpenStax.3+ −pH
− −pOH
w
3+ −
3+ −
3+ −

7.2.4.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1951737.2.4: Acid Strength
Assess the relative strengths of acids according to their i onization constants
Carry out equilibrium calculations for weak acid systems
We can rank the strengths of acids by the extent to which they ionize in aqueous solution. The ionizati on of an acid in water is
given by the general expression:
In the ionization process, water acts as the base accep ting a proton from the acid, is the conjugate base of the acid, and
the hydronium ion () is the conjugate acid of water. A strong acid yields 100% (or very nearly so) of and when the
acid ionizes in water. Table lists several strong a cids. A weak acid does not completely ionize in water, y ielding only small
amounts of and.
Table: Some of the common strong acids and bases are li sted here.
Common Strong Acids Common Strong Bases
perchloric acid
hydrochloric acid sodium hydroxide
hydrobromic acid potassium hydroxide
hydroiodic acid barium hydroxide
nitric acid
sulfuric acid
The relative strengths of acids may be determined by measuring their equilibrium constants in aqueous solut ions. In solutions of
the same concentration, stronger acids ionize to a gre ater extent, and so yield higher concentrations of h ydronium ions than do
weaker acids. The equilibrium constant for an acid is cal led the acid-ionization constant, K. For the reaction of an acid:
we write the equation for the ionization constant as:
where the concentrations are those at equilibrium. Al though water is a reactant in the reaction, it is the solvent as well, so we do not
include [H O] in the equation. The larger the of an a cid, the larger the concentration of and relative to the
concentration of the nonionized acid, at equilibri um. Thus a stronger acid has a larger ionization cons tant than does a weaker
acid. The ionization constants increase as the strengths of the acids increase.
The following data on acid-ionization constants indic ate the order of acid strength:
Table gives the ionization constants for several wea k acids; additional ionization constants can be fou nd in Reference Table
E1.
Table: Ionization Constants of Some Weak AcidsLearning Objectives
a

7.2.4.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/195173Acid K at 25 °C
1.5 × 10
1.2 × 10
7.5 × 10
3.5 × 10
4.6 × 10
2 × 10
1.8 × 10
1.4 × 10
1.8 × 10
4.3 × 10
1.0 × 10
9.1 × 10
3.5 × 10
2.0 × 10
6.2 × 10
5.6 × 10
4.8 × 10
2.4 × 10
1.0 × 10

Another measure of the strength of an acid is its percent ionization. The percent ionization of a weak acid is the ratio of the
concentration of the ionized acid to the initial acid co ncentration, times 100:
Because the ratio includes the initial concentratio n, the percent ionization for a solution of a given weak acid varies depending on
the original concentration of the acid, and actually de creases with increasing acid concentration.
Calculate the percent ionization of a 0.125- M solution of nitrous acid (a weak acid), with a pH of 2.09.
Solution
The percent ionization for an acid is:
The chemical equation for the dissociation of the nitro us acid is:a
−2
−2
−3
−4
−4
−4
−4
−4
−5
−7
−7
−8
−8
−9
−10
−10
−11
−12
−14
Example: Calculation of Percent Ionization from pH

7.2.4.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/195173Since 10 =, we find that, so that percent ionization (Eq uation) is:
Remember, the logarithm 2.09 indicates a hydronium ion concentration with only two significant figures.
Calculate the percent ionization of a 0.10 M solution of acetic acid with a pH of 2.89.
Answer
1.3% ionized
We can rank the strengths of bases by their tendenc y to form hydroxide ions in aqueous solution. The reac tion of a Brønsted-Lowry
base with water is given by:
Water is the acid that reacts with the base, is the conjugate acid of the base, and the hydroxide ion is the conjugate base of
water. A strong base yields 100% (or very nearly so) of OH and HB when it reacts with water; Table lists seve ral strong
bases. A weak base yields a small proportion of hydrox ide ions. Soluble ionic hydroxides such as NaOH are consid ered strong
bases because they dissociate completely when dissolved in water.
The extent to which an acid, HA, donates protons to water molecules is relative to the strength of the conjug ate base, A, of the
acid. If A is a strong base, any protons that are don ated to water molecules are recaptured by A. Thus the re is relatively little A
and in solution, and the acid, HA, is weak. However, if A is a weak base, water binds the protons more strongly, an d the
solution contains primarily A and H O —the acid is stro ng. Strong acids form very weak conjugate bases, and we ak acids form
stronger conjugate bases.
Figure lists a series of acids and bases in order of the decreasing strengths of the acids and the corres ponding increasing
strengths of the bases. The acid and base in a given row a re conjugate to each other.
The first six acids in Figure are the most common st rong acids. These acids are completely dissociated in aqueous solution.
The conjugate bases of these acids are weaker bases th an water. When one of these acids dissolves in water, th eir protons are
completely transferred to water, the stronger base.
Those acids that lie between the hydronium ion and wa ter in Figure form conjugate bases that can compete with water for
possession of a proton. Both hydronium ions and nonio nized acid molecules are present in equilibrium in a solution of one of these
acids. Compounds that are weaker acids than water (tho se found below water in the column of acids) in Figure exhibit no
observable acidic behavior when dissolved in water. The ir conjugate bases are stronger than the hydroxide i on, and if any conjugate
base were formed, it would react with water to re-form the a cid.−pH
Exercise
3+

7.2.4.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/195173
Figure: The chart shows the relative strengths of conju gate acid-base pairs.
The extent to which a base forms hydroxide ion in aq ueous solution depends on the strength of the base rel ative to that of the
hydroxide ion, as shown in the last column in Figure. A strong base, such as one of those lying below hydr oxide ion, accepts
protons from water to yield 100% of the conjugate ac id and hydroxide ion. Those bases lying between water an d hydroxide ion
accept protons from water, but a mixture of the hydro xide ion and the base results. Bases that are weaker than water (those that lie
above water in the column of bases) show no observable basic behavior in aqueous solution.
We can determine the relative acid strengths of and HCN by comparing their ionization constants. The ioni zation
constant of HCN is given in Table E1 as 4.9 × 10. The ionization constant of is not listed, but the ion ization constant
of its conjugate base, NH, is listed as 1.8 × 10. Deter mine the ionization constant of, and decide which i s the stronger
acid, HCN or.
Answer
is the slightly stronger acid (K for = 5.6 × 10).
The Ionization of Weak Acids and Weak Bases
Many acids and bases are weak; that is, they do not i onize fully in aqueous solution. A solution of a wea k acid in water is a mixture
of the nonionized acid, hydronium ion, and the conju gate base of the acid, with the nonionized acid prese nt in the greatest
concentration. Thus, a weak acid increases the hydroniu m ion concentration in an aqueous solution (but not as much as the same
amount of a strong acid).
Acetic acid () is a weak acid. When we add acetic acid to wat er, it ionizes to a small extent according to the equation:Exercise
−10
3−5
a−10

7.2.4.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/195173giving an equilibrium mixture with most of the acid present in the nonionized (molecular) form. This equi librium, like other
equilibria, is dynamic; acetic acid molecules donate hydrogen ions to water molecules and form hydronium io ns and acetate ions at
the same rate that hydronium ions donate hydrogen i ons to acetate ions to reform acetic acid molecules and water molecules. We
can tell by measuring the pH of an aqueous solution o f known concentration that only a fraction of the wea k acid is ionized at any
moment (Figure). The remaining weak acid is present in t he nonionized form.
For acetic acid, at equilibrium:
Figure: pH paper indicates that a 0.l-M solution of (beaker on left) has a pH of 1. The acid is fully ion ized and =
0.1 M. A 0.1-M solution of CH CO H (beaker on right) has a pH of 3 (= 0.001 M) because the weak acid CH CO H is
only partially ionized. In this solution,. (credit: mo dification of work by Sahar Atwa)
Acetic acid is the principal ingredient in vinegar; that's why it tastes sour. At equilibrium, a solution co ntains [CH CO H] =
0.0787 M and. What is the value of K for acetic acid?
Vinegar is a solution of acetic acid, a weak acid. (c redit: modification of work by “HomeSpot HQ”/Flickr)
Solution
We are asked to calculate an equilibrium constant fr om equilibrium concentrations. At equilibrium, the v alue of the equilibrium
constant is equal to the reaction quotient for the reacti on:
What is the equilibrium constant for the ionization of the ion, the weak acid used in some household cleansers:
In one mixture of NaHSO and Na SO at equilibrium, = 0.027 M;; and.3 2 3 2
Example: Determination of K from Equilibrium Concentrationsa
3 2
a
Exercise
4 2 4

7.2.4.6 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/195173Answer
for
The pH of a 0.0516- M solution of nitrous acid,, is 2.34. What is its K?
Solution
We determine an equilibrium constant starting with th e initial concentrations of HNO,, and as well as one of the
final concentrations, the concentration of hydronium ion at equilibrium. (Remember that pH is simply anoth er way to express
the concentration of hydronium ion.)
We can solve this problem with the following steps in whic h x is a change in concentration of a species in the reaction:
We can summarize the various concentrations and chan ges as shown here (the concentration of water does not appear in the
expression for the equilibrium constant, so we do not need to consider its concentration):
To get the various values in the ICE (Initial, Chan ge, Equilibrium) table, we first calculate, the equi librium
concentration of, from the pH:
The change in concentration of,, is the differenc e between the equilibrium concentration of H O, which we
determined from the pH, and the initial concentration,. The initial concentration of is its concentrat ion in pure
water, which is so much less than the final concentratio n that we approximate it as zero (~0).
The change in concentration of is equal to the chan ge in concentration of. For each 1 mol of that form s, 1
mol of forms. The equilibrium concentration of HNO is e qual to its initial concentration plus the change i n its
concentration.
Now we can fill in the ICE table with the concentrations at eq uilibrium, as shown here:Example: Determination of K from pHa
a
3+

7.2.4.7 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/195173
Finally, we calculate the value of the equilibrium constan t using the data in the table:
Formic acid, HCO H, is the irritant that causes the body’s reaction to ant stings.
The pain of an ant’s sting is caused by formic acid. (c redit: John Tann)
What is the concentration of hydronium ion and the pH in a 0. 534-M solution of formic acid?
Solution
1. Determine x and equilibrium concentrations. The equilibrium expression is:
The concentration of water does not appear in the exp ression for the equilibrium constant, so we do not nee d to consider its
change in concentration when setting up the ICE table.
The table shows initial concentrations (concentrations before the acid ionizes), changes in concentration, and equilibrium
concentrations follows (the data given in the problem ap pear in color):
2. Solve for x and the equilibrium concentrations. At equilibrium:
Now solve for x. Because the initial concentration of acid is reas onably large and K is very small, we assume that x << 0.534,
which permits us to simplify the denominator term as (0.534 − x) = 0.534. This gives:Example: Equilibrium Concentrations in a Solution of a Weak Acid
a

7.2.4.8 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/195173Solve for x as follows:
To check the assumption that is small compared to 0.534, we calculate:
x is less than 5% of the initial concentration; the assumpt ion is valid.
We find the equilibrium concentration of hydronium ion in this formic acid solution from its initial c oncentration and the
change in that concentration as indicated in the last li ne of the table:
The pH of the solution can be found by taking the negat ive log of the, so:
Only a small fraction of a weak acid ionizes in aqueou s solution. What is the percent ionization of aceti c acid in a 0.100- M
solution of acetic acid, CH CO H?
Hint
Determine at equilibrium.) Recall that the percent i onization is the fraction of acetic acid that is ion ized × 100,
or.
Answer
percent ionization = 1.3%
Some weak acids ionize to such an extent that the simpli fying assumption that x is small relative to the initial concentration of t he
acid or base is inappropriate. As we solve for the equi librium concentrations in such cases, we will see that we cannot neglect the
change in the initial concentration of the acid or base, and we must solve the equilibrium equations by using the qu adratic equation.
Sodium bisulfate, NaHSO, is used in some household cleans ers because it contains the ion, a weak acid. What is the
pH of a 0.50- M solution of?
Solution
We need to determine the equilibrium concentration of the hydronium ion that results from the ionizatio n of so that we
can use to determine the pH. As in the previous examples, we can approach the solution by the following steps:Exercise: acetic acid
3 2
Example: Equilibrium Concentrations in a Solution of a Weak Acid

7.2.4.9 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/195173
1. Determine x and equilibrium concentrations. This table shows the changes and concentrations:
2. Solve for x and the concentrations.
As we begin solving for x, we will find this is more complicated than in previou s examples. As we discuss these complications
we should not lose track of the fact that it is still the pur pose of this step to determine the value of x.
At equilibrium:
If we assume that x is small and approximate (0.50 − x) as 0.50, we find:
When we check the assumption, we confirm:
which for this system is
The value of is not less than 5% of 0.50, so the assumptio n is not valid. We need the quadratic formula to find.
The equation:
gives
or
This equation can be solved using the quadratic formula. For a n equation of the form
x is given by the equation:

7.2.4.10 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/195173In this problem, a = 1, b = 1.2 × 10, and c = −6.0 × 10.
Solving for x gives a negative root (which cannot be correct since con centration cannot be negative) and a positive root:
Now determine the hydronium ion concentration and the pH:
The pH of this solution is:
Summary
The strengths of Brønsted-Lowry acids in aqueous soluti ons can be determined by their acid ionization cons tants. Stronger acids
form weaker conjugate bases, and weaker acids form stronge r conjugate bases. Thus strong acids are completely ionized in aqueous
solution because their conjugate bases are weaker bas es than water. Weak acids are only partially ionized because their conjugate
bases are strong enough to compete successfully with water for possession of protons. Strong bases react wit h water to
quantitatively form hydroxide ions. Weak bases give only small amounts of hydroxide ion.
Key Equations
Glossary
acid ionization constant (K)
equilibrium constant for the ionization of a weak acid
percent ionization
ratio of the concentration of the ionized acid to the i nitial acid concentration, times 100
Contributors and Attributions
Paul Flowers (University of North Carolina - Pembroke), Kla us Theopold (University of Delaware) and Richard Langl ey
(Stephen F. Austin State University) with contributing au thors. Textbook content produced by OpenStax College i s licensed
under a Creative Commons Attribution License 4.0 license. Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/85abf1932bd...a7ac8df6@9.110).
7.2.4: Acid Strength is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.−3 −3
a

1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170074SECTION OVERVIEW
Topic H - Condensed States and Attractive Forces Between Particles
WHAT YOU SHOULD BE ABLE TO DO WHEN YOU HA VE FINISHED THIS TOPIC:
1. Compare/contrast the qualitative properties of thre e states of matter: solid, liquid, gas
2. Know the two factors that determine the physical state of ma tter.
3. Know how average kinetic energy of the particles changes with temperature.
4. Know the types and relative strengths of attractive forc es between particles.
5. Relate the physical properties of substances to the attractive forces between particles:
a. For solids: melting point, malleability, ductility, con ductivity, solubility in water
b. For liquids: boiling point, surface tension, viscosit y, vapor pressure, solubility in water
6. Know the four types of solids (molecular, ionic, metalli c, network covalent) and categorize individual substance s based on
their physical behavior.
7. Sketch and interpret a typical phase diagram for a pu re substance, including identification of the triple point and the critical
point.
8. Construct a Born-Haber diagram given appropriate ene rgy values, and calculate any of the individual energy va lues where
appropriate.
8.1: Condensed States and Intermolecular Forces
8.1.1: A Molecular Comparison of Gases, Liquids, and Solids
8.1.2: Intermolecular Forces
8.1.3: Properties of Liquids
8.1.4: Properties of Solids
8.1.5: Phase Changes
8.1.6: Phase Diagrams
8.1.7: The Born-Haber Cycle
Topic H - Condensed States and Attractive Forces Between Particles is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed,
and/or curated by LibreTexts.Learning Objectives

1CHAPTER OVERVIEW
8.1: Condensed States and Intermolecular Forces
The physical properties of a substance depends upon i ts physical state. Water vapor, liquid water and ice a ll have the same chemical
properties, but their physical properties are consid erably different. In general Covalent bonds determine: molecular shape, bond
energies, chemical properties, while intermolecular for ces (non-covalent bonds) influence the physical prope rties of liquids and
solids. The kinetic molecular theory of gases descri bed in an earlier chapter gives a reasonably accura te description of the behavior
of gases. A similar model can be applied to liquids, but it must take into account the nonzero volumes of particles and the presence
of strong intermolecular attractive forces.
8.1.1: A Molecular Comparison of Gases, Liquids, and Solids
8.1.2: Intermolecular Forces
8.1.3: Properties of Liquids
8.1.4: Properties of Solids
8.1.5: Phase Changes
8.1.6: Phase Diagrams
8.1.7: The Born-Haber Cycle
Thumbnail: A water drop. (CC BY 2.0; José Manuel Suárez).
8.1: Condensed States and Intermolecular Forces is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by
LibreTexts.

8.1.1.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1700768.1.1: A Molecular Comparison of Gases, Liquids, and Solids
To be familiar with the kinetic molecular description of gases, liquids, and solids.
The physical properties of a substance depends upon its physical s tate. Water vapor, liquid water and ice all have the same chemical
properties, but their physical properties are considerably different. In general Covalent bonds determine: molecular shape, bond
energies, chemical properties, while intermolecular forces (non-covalent bonds) influence the physical properties of liquids and
solids. The kinetic molecular theory of gases gives a reasonably accurate description of the behavior of gases. A similar model can
be applied to liquids, but it must take into account the nonzero volumes of particles and the presence o f strong intermolecular
attractive forces.
Figure: Three fundamental states of matter: gas, liqui d, and solid. These states are represented, left to righ t, the air around
clouds, a drop of water, and an ice sculpture, respect ively. Images used with permission from Wikipedia.
The state of a substance depends on the balance between the kinetic energy of the individual particles (molecules or atoms) and the
intermolecular forces. The kinetic energy keeps the molecules apart and moving around, and is a function of the temperature of the
substance and the intermolecular forces try to draw t he particles together (Figure). A discussed previou sly, gasses are very
sensitive to temperatures and pressure. However, these al so affect liquids and solids too. Heating and cooling can change the kinetic
energy of the particles in a substance, and so, we can chang e the physical state of a substance by heating or c ooling it. Increasing
the pressure on a substance forces the molecules closer t ogether, which increases the strength of intermolecular forces
(a) in the gaseous state (b) as a liquid (c) in solid form
Figure: Molecular level picture of gases, liquids and solids.
Below is an overview of the general properties of the th ree different phases of matter.
Properties of Gases
A collection of widely separated molecules
The kinetic energy of the molecules is greater than a ny attractive forces between the molecules
The lack of any significant attractive force between mo lecules allows a gas to expand to fill its container
If attractive forces become large enough, then the gases e xhibit non-ideal behaviorLearning Objectives

8.1.1.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170076Properties of Liquids
The intermolecular attractive forces are strong enoug h to hold molecules close together
Liquids are more dense and less compressible than gasses
Liquids have a definite volume, independent of the size a nd shape of their container
The attractive forces are not strong enough, however, to keep neighboring molecules in a fixed position and molecules are free
to move past or slide over one another
Thus, liquids can be poured and assume the shape of their containers
Properties of Solids
The intermolecular forces between neighboring molecules are strong enough to keep them locked in position
Solids (like liquids) are not very compressible due to the lack of space between molecules
If the molecules in a solid adopt a highly ordered packing arra ngement, the structures are said to be crystalline
Due to the strong intermolecular forces between neighboring molecules, solids are rigid
Cooling a gas may change the state to a liquid
Cooling a liquid may change the state to a solid
Increasing the pressure on a gas may change the state to a liquid
Increasing the pressure on a liquid may change the state t o a solid
Video: Video highlighting the properties for the th ree states of matter. Source found at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sKvoVzukHo.
Physical Properties of Liquids
In a gas, the distance between molecules, whether monat omic or polyatomic, is very large compared with the si ze of the molecules;
thus gases have a low density and are highly compressi ble. In contrast, the molecules in liquids are very c lose together, with
essentially no empty space between them. As in gases, however, the molecules in liquids are in constant motio n, and their kinetic
energy (and hence their speed) depends on their tem perature. We begin our discussion by examining some of the characteristic
properties of liquids to see how each is consistent with a m odified kinetic molecular description.
The properties of liquids can be explained using a m odified version of the kinetic molecular theory of gases described previously
This model explains the higher density, greater order, and lower compressibility of liquids versus gases; the thermal expansion of
liquids; why they diffuse; and why they adopt the sha pe (but not the volume) of their containers. A kine tic molecular description of
liquids must take into account both the nonzero vol umes of particles and the presence of strong intermo lecular attractive forces.
Solids and liquids have particles that are fairly cl ose to one another, and are thus called " condensed phases " to distinguish them
from gases
Density: The molecules of a liquid are packed relatively close together. Consequently, liquids are much denser than gases. The
density of a liquid is typically about the same as the den sity of the solid state of the substance. Densities of liquid s are therefore

8.1.1.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170076more commonly measured in units of grams per cubic centim eter (g/cm) or grams per milliliter (g/mL) than in grams pe r liter
(g/L), the unit commonly used for gases.
Molecular Order: Liquids exhibit short-range order because strong inte rmolecular attractive forces cause the molecules to
pack together rather tightly. Because of their higher ki netic energy compared to the molecules in a solid, ho wever, the molecules
in a liquid move rapidly with respect to one another. Thu s unlike the ions in the ionic solids, the molecules in liqui ds are not
arranged in a repeating three-dimensional array. Unlike t he molecules in gases, however, the arrangement of the mo lecules in a
liquid is not completely random.
Compressibility: Liquids have so little empty space between their compon ent molecules that they cannot be readily
compressed. Compression would force the atoms on adjacent m olecules to occupy the same region of space.
Thermal Expansion: The intermolecular forces in liquids are strong enough to keep them from expanding significantly when
heated (typically only a few percent over a 100°C tempe rature range). Thus the volumes of liquids are somewhat fixe d. Notice
from Table S1 (with a shorten version in Table) that the de nsity of water, for example, changes by only about 3% over a
90-degree temperature range.
Table: The Density of Water at Various Temperatures
T (°C) Density (g/cm)
0 0.99984
30 0.99565
60 0.98320
90 0.96535
Diffusion: Molecules in liquids diffuse because they are in con stant motion. A molecule in a liquid cannot move far befor e
colliding with another molecule, however, so the mean fre e path in liquids is very short, and the rate of diffusion is much slower
than in gases.
Fluidity: Liquids can flow, adjusting to the shape of their contai ners, because their molecules are free to move. This freed om of
motion and their close spacing allow the molecules in a liq uid to move rapidly into the openings left by other mo lecules, in turn
generating more openings, and so forth (Figure).
Figure: Why Liquids Flow. Molecules in a liquid are in constant motion. Consequently, when the flask is tilted, molecules
move to the left and down due to the force of gravi ty, and the openings are occupied by other molecules. The result is a net flow of
liquid out of the container. (CC BY-SA-NC; Anonymou s vy request).
Contributors and Attributions
Mike Blaber (Florida State University)3

8.1.1.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1700768.1.1: A Molecular Comparison of Gases, Liquids, and So lids is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or
curated by LibreTexts.

8.1.2.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1700778.1.2: Intermolecular Forces
To describe the intermolecular forces in liquids.
The properties of liquids are intermediate between th ose of gases and solids, but are more similar to solids. In contrast to
intra molecular forces, such as the covalent bonds that h old atoms together in molecules and polyatomic ions, inter molecular forces
hold molecules together in a liquid or solid. Inter molecular forces are generally much weaker than cova lent bonds. For example, it
requires 927 kJ to overcome the intramolecular forc es and break both O–H bonds in 1 mol of water, but it ta kes only about 41 kJ to
overcome the intermolecular attractions and convert 1 mol of liquid water to water vapor at 100°C. (Despi te this seemingly low
value, the intermolecular forces in liquid water are among the strongest such forces known!) Given the larg e difference in the
strengths of intra- and intermolecular forces, changes between the solid, liquid, and gaseous states almost invariably occur for
molecular substances without breaking covalent bonds.
The properties of liquids are intermediate between those of gases and soli ds but are more
similar to solids.
Intermolecular forces determine bulk properties suc h as the melting points of solids and the boiling po ints of liquids. Liquids boil
when the molecules have enough thermal energy to over come the intermolecular attractive forces that hold them together, thereby
forming bubbles of vapor within the liquid. Similarly, solids melt when the molecules acquire enough therm al energy to overcome
the intermolecular forces that lock them into place in the solid.
Intermolecular forces are electrostatic in nature; t hat is, they arise from the interaction between posi tively and negatively charged
species. Like covalent and ionic bonds, intermolecula r interactions are the sum of both attractive and re pulsive components.
Because electrostatic interactions fall off rapidly with increasing distance between molecules, intermolec ular interactions are most
important for solids and liquids, where the molecules are close together. These interactions become importan t for gases only at very
high pressures, where they are responsible for the o bserved deviations from the ideal gas law at high pr essures. (For more
information on the behavior of real gases and deviations f rom the ideal gas law,.)
In this section, we explicitly consider three kinds of intermolecular interactions: There are two additi onal types of electrostatic
interaction that you are already familiar with: the ion–ion interactions that are responsible for ionic b onding and the ion–dipole
interactions that occur when ionic substances dissolv e in a polar substance such as water. The first two ar e often described
collectively as van der Waals forces.
Dipole–Dipole Interactions
Polar covalent bonds behave as if the bonded atoms h ave localized fractional charges that are equal but opposite (i.e., the two
bonded atoms generate a dipole). If the structure of a molecule is such that the individual bond dipoles do not cancel one another,
then the molecule has a net dipole moment. Molecules with net dipole moments tend to align themselves so that the positive end of
one dipole is near the negative end of another and vice v ersa, as shown in Figure.
Figure: Attractive and Repulsive Dipole–Dipole Intera ctions. (a and b) Molecular orientations in which the positive end of
one dipole (δ) is near the negative end of another (δ) (and vice versa) produce attractive interactions. (c and d) Molecular
orientations that juxtapose the positive or negative e nds of the dipoles on adjacent molecules produce repul sive interactions.Learning Objectives

8.1.2.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170077These arrangements are more stable than arrangements i n which two positive or two negative ends are adjacent (Figure).
Hence dipole–dipole interactions, such as those in Fi gure, are attractive intermolecular interactions, whereas those in
Figure are repulsive intermolecular interactions. Because molecules in a liquid move freely and cont inuously, molecules
always experience both attractive and repulsive dipol e–dipole interactions simultaneously, as shown in Figur e. On average,
however, the attractive interactions dominate.
Figure: Both Attractive and Repulsive Dipole–Dipole Interactio ns Occur in a Liquid Sample with Many Molecules
Because each end of a dipole possesses only a fraction of the charge of an electron, dipole–dipole intera ctions are substantially
weaker than the interactions between two ions, each of which has a charge of at least ±1, or between a dipole and an ion, in which
one of the species has at least a full positive or negative charge. Thus a substance such as, which is p artially held together by
dipole–dipole interactions, is a gas at room tempera ture and 1 atm pressure, whereas, which is held togeth er by interionic
interactions, is a high-melting-point solid. Within a series of compounds of similar molar mass, the str ength of the intermolecular
interactions increases as the dipole moment of the molecu les increases, as shown in Table.
Table: Relationships between the Dipole Moment and t he Boiling Point for Organic Compounds of Similar Mola r Mass
Compound Molar Mass (g/mol) Dipole Moment (D) Boiling Point (K)
C H (cyclopropane) 42 0 240
CH OCH (dimethyl ether) 46 1.30 248
CH CN (acetonitrile) 41 3.9
Arrange ethyl methyl ether (CH OCH CH), 2-methylpropane [isobutane, (CH) CHCH], and acetone (CH COCH) in order
of increasing boiling points. Their structures are as foll ows:3 6
3 3
Example
3 2 3 3 2 3 3 3

8.1.2.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170077
Given: compounds
Asked for: order of increasing boiling points
Strategy:
Compare the molar masses and the polarities of the compounds. Compounds with higher molar masses and that are polar will
have the highest boiling points.
Solution:
The three compounds have essentially the same molar mass (58–60 g/mol), so we must look at differences in polarity to predict
the strength of the intermolecular dipole–dipole inte ractions and thus the boiling points of the compounds.
The first compound, 2-methylpropane, contains only C –H bonds, which are not very polar because C and H have similar
electronegativities. It should therefore have a very smal l (but nonzero) dipole moment and a very low boiling poi nt.
Ethyl methyl ether has a structure similar to H O; it contains two polar C–O single bonds oriented at about a 109° angle to
each other, in addition to relatively nonpolar C–H bo nds. As a result, the C–O bond dipoles partially reinf orce one another and
generate a significant dipole moment that should give a moderately high boiling point.
Acetone contains a polar C=O double bond oriented at about 120° to two methyl groups with nonpolar C–H bonds. The C–O
bond dipole therefore corresponds to the molecular d ipole, which should result in both a rather large dip ole moment and a high
boiling point.
Thus we predict the following order of boiling points:
2-methylpropane < ethyl methyl ether < acetone.
This result is in good agreement with the actual data: 2-methylpropane, boiling point = −11.7°C, and the d ipole moment (μ) =
0.13 D; methyl ethyl ether, boiling point = 7.4°C and μ = 1.17 D; acetone, boiling point = 56.1°C and μ = 2.88 D.
Arrange carbon tetrafluoride (CF), ethyl methyl sulfi de (CH SC H), dimethyl sulfoxide [(CH) S=O], and 2-methylb utane
[isopentane, (CH) CHCH CH] in order of decreasing boiling points.
Answer
dimethyl sulfoxide (boiling point = 189.9°C) > ethy l methyl sulfide (boiling point = 67°C) > 2-methylbu tane (boiling point
= 27.8°C) > carbon tetrafluoride (boiling point = −128°C)
London Dispersion Forces
Thus far we have considered only interactions between polar molecules, but other factors must be considere d to explain why many
nonpolar molecules, such as bromine, benzene, and h exane, are liquids at room temperature, and others, suc h as iodine and
naphthalene, are solids. Even the noble gases can be liquefied or solidified at low temperatures, high p ressures, or both (Table
).2
Exercise
4 3 2 5 3 2
3 2 2 3

8.1.2.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170077What kind of attractive forces can exist between non polar molecules or atoms? This question was answered b y Fritz London
(1900–1954), a German physicist who later worked in the United States. In 1930, London proposed that temporary fluctuations in
the electron distributions within atoms and nonpolar molecules could result in the formation of short-l ived instantaneous dipole
moments, which produce attractive forces called London dispersion forces between otherwise nonpolar substances.
Table: Normal Melting and Boiling Points of Some Ele ments and Nonpolar Compounds
Substance Molar Mass (g/mol) Melting Point (°C) Boiling Point (°C)
Ar 40 −189.4 −185.9
Xe 131 −111.8 −108.1
N 28 −210 −195.8
O 32 −218.8 −183.0
F 38 −219.7 −188.1
I 254 113.7 184.4
CH 16 −182.5 −161.5
Consider a pair of adjacent He atoms, for example. On a verage, the two electrons in each He atom are uniforml y distributed around
the nucleus. Because the electrons are in constant motion, however, their distribution in one atom is like ly to be asymmetrical at
any given instant, resulting in an instantaneous dip ole moment. As shown in part (a) in Figure, the insta ntaneous dipole
moment on one atom can interact with the electrons in an adjacent atom, pulling them toward the positive en d of the instantaneous
dipole or repelling them from the negative end. The net effect is that the first atom causes the temporary formation of a dipole,
called an induced dipole, in the second. Interactions bet ween these temporary dipoles cause atoms to be attracted to one another.
Figure: Instantaneous Dipole Moments. The formation of an instantaneous dipole moment on one He atom (a) or an H
molecule (b) results in the formation of an induced d ipole on an adjacent atom or molecule.
Instantaneous dipole–induced dipole interactions be tween nonpolar molecules can produce intermolecular a ttractions just as they
produce interatomic attractions in monatomic substan ces like Xe. This effect, illustrated for two H molecul es in part (b) in Figure
, tends to become more pronounced as atomic and mole cular masses increase (Table). For example, Xe boils at2

8.1.2.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170077−108.1°C, whereas He boils at −269°C. The reason for thi s trend is that the strength of London dispersion force s is related to the
ease with which the electron distribution in a given at om can be perturbed. In small atoms such as He, the t wo 1 s electrons are held
close to the nucleus in a very small volume, and ele ctron–electron repulsions are strong enough to prev ent significant asymmetry in
their distribution. In larger atoms such as Xe, howeve r, the outer electrons are much less strongly attra cted to the nucleus because
of filled intervening shells. As a result, it is relativ ely easy to temporarily deform the electron distrib ution to generate an
instantaneous or induced dipole. The ease of deformat ion of the electron distribution in an atom or molec ule is called its
polarizability. Because the electron distribution is more easily perturbed in large, heavy species than i n small, light species, we say
that heavier substances tend to be much more polarizable than lighter ones.
For similar substances, London dispersion forces get stronger with increasing molecular
size.
The polarizability of a substance also determines how it interacts with ions and species that possess perma nent dipoles. Thus
London dispersion forces are responsible for the gener al trend toward higher boiling points with increased mo lecular mass and
greater surface area in a homologous series of compo unds, such as the alkanes (part (a) in Figure). The s trengths of London
dispersion forces also depend significantly on mole cular shape because shape determines how much of one molecule can interact
with its neighboring molecules at any given time. For e xample, part (b) in Figure shows 2,2-dimethylpropane (neopentane)
and n-pentane, both of which have the empirical formula C H. Neopentane is almost spherical, with a small surface area for
intermolecular interactions, whereas n-pentane has an extended conformation that enables i t to come into close contact with other
n-pentane molecules. As a result, the boiling point of n eopentane (9.5°C) is more than 25°C lower than the bo iling point of npentane (36.1°C).
Figure: Mass and Surface Area Affect the Strength of Lon don Dispersion Forces. (a) In this series of four simple al kanes,
larger molecules have stronger London forces between t hem than smaller molecules and consequently higher boi ling points. (b)
Linear n-pentane molecules have a larger surface area and stro nger intermolecular forces than spherical neopentane molecules. As a
result, neopentane is a gas at room temperature, where as n-pentane is a volatile liquid.
All molecules, whether polar or nonpolar, are attracte d to one another by London dispersion forces in addit ion to any other
attractive forces that may be present. In general, howe ver, dipole–dipole interactions in small polar mole cules are significantly
stronger than London dispersion forces, so the former pred ominate.
Arrange n-butane, propane, 2-methylpropane [isobutene, (CH) CHCH], and n-pentane in order of increasing boiling points.
Given: compounds
Asked for: order of increasing boiling points
Strategy:
Determine the intermolecular forces in the compounds a nd then arrange the compounds according to the stren gth of those
forces. The substance with the weakest forces will have the lowes t boiling point.
Solution:5 12
Example
3 2 3

8.1.2.6 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170077The four compounds are alkanes and nonpolar, so Londo n dispersion forces are the only important intermol ecular forces.
These forces are generally stronger with increasing mol ecular mass, so propane should have the lowest boiling point and npentane should have the highest, with the two butane isomers falling in between. Of the two butane isomers, 2-m ethylpropane
is more compact, and n-butane has the more extended shape. Consequently, we e xpect intermolecular interactions for n-butane
to be stronger due to its larger surface area, resu lting in a higher boiling point. The overall order is thus as follows, with actual
boiling points in parentheses: propane (−42.1°C) < 2-meth ylpropane (−11.7°C) < n-butane (−0.5°C) < n-pentane (36.1°C).
Arrange GeH, SiCl, SiH, CH, and GeCl in order of decreasing boil ing points.
Answer
GeCl (87°C) > SiCl (57.6°C) > GeH (−88.5°C) > SiH (−111.8°C) > CH (−161°C)
Hydrogen Bonds
Molecules with hydrogen atoms bonded to electronegati ve atoms such as O, N, and F (and to a much lesser exten t Cl and S) tend to
exhibit unusually strong intermolecular interactions. These result in much higher boiling points than ar e observed for substances in
which London dispersion forces dominate, as illustra ted for the covalent hydrides of elements of groups 14– 17 in Figure.
Methane and its heavier congeners in group 14 form a series whose boiling points increase smoothly with incr easing molar mass.
This is the expected trend in nonpolar molecules, fo r which London dispersion forces are the exclusive inte rmolecular forces. In
contrast, the hydrides of the lightest members of gro ups 15–17 have boiling points that are more than 10 0°C greater than predicted
on the basis of their molar masses. The effect is most d ramatic for water: if we extend the straight line conne cting the points for
H Te and H Se to the line for period 2, we obtain an est imated boiling point of −130°C for water! Imagine th e implications for life
on Earth if water boiled at −130°C rather than 100°C.
Figure: The Effects of Hydrogen Bonding on Boiling Po ints. These plots of the boiling points of the covalent hydrides of the
elements of groups 14–17 show that the boiling points o f the lightest members of each series for which hydroge n bonding is
possible (HF, NH, and H O) are anomalously high for com pounds with such low molecular masses.
Why do strong intermolecular forces produce such ano malously high boiling points and other unusual proper ties, such as high
enthalpies of vaporization and high melting points? The answer lies in the highly polar nature of the bo nds between hydrogen and
very electronegative elements such as O, N, and F. The l arge difference in electronegativity results in a la rge partial positive charge
on hydrogen and a correspondingly large partial neg ative charge on the O, N, or F atom. Consequently, H–O, H– N, and H–F bonds
have very large bond dipoles that can interact stron gly with one another. Because a hydrogen atom is so smal l, these dipoles can
also approach one another more closely than most othe r dipoles. The combination of large bond dipoles an d short dipole–dipoleExercise
4 4 4 4 4
4 4 4 4 4
2 2
3 2

8.1.2.7 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170077distances results in very strong dipole–dipole inte ractions called hydrogen bonds, as shown for ice in Fi gure. A hydrogen
bond is usually indicated by a dotted line between t he hydrogen atom attached to O, N, or F (the hydrogen bond donor) and the
atom that has the lone pair of electrons (the hydrogen bond acceptor). Because each water molecule contains two hydrogen a toms
and two lone pairs, a tetrahedral arrangement maximiz es the number of hydrogen bonds that can be formed. In the structure of ice,
each oxygen atom is surrounded by a distorted tetrah edron of hydrogen atoms that form bridges to the ox ygen atoms of adjacent
water molecules. The bridging hydrogen atoms are not equidistant from the two oxygen atoms they connect, however. Instead, each
hydrogen atom is 101 pm from one oxygen and 174 pm f rom the other. In contrast, each oxygen atom is bonde d to two H atoms at
the shorter distance and two at the longer distance, c orresponding to two O–H covalent bonds and two O ⋅⋅⋅H hydrogen bonds from
adjacent water molecules, respectively. The resultin g open, cagelike structure of ice means that the so lid is actually slightly less
dense than the liquid, which explains why ice floats on water rather than sinks.
Figure: The Hydrogen-Bonded Structure of Ice.
Each water molecule accepts two hydrogen bonds from two other water molecules and donates two hydrogen atoms t o form
hydrogen bonds with two more water molecules, producin g an open, cagelike structure. The structure of liquid water is very
similar, but in the liquid, the hydrogen bonds are conti nually broken and formed because of rapid molecular m otion.
Hydrogen bond formation requires both a hydrogen bond donor and a hydrogen bond
acceptor.
Because ice is less dense than liquid water, rivers, lakes, and oceans freeze from the top down. In fact, th e ice forms a protective
surface layer that insulates the rest of the water, all owing fish and other organisms to survive in the lowe r levels of a frozen lake or
sea. If ice were denser than the liquid, the ice form ed at the surface in cold weather would sink as fast as it formed. Bodies of water
would freeze from the bottom up, which would be lethal for most aquatic creatures. The expansion of water wh en freezing also
explains why automobile or boat engines must be protec ted by “antifreeze” and why unprotected pipes in house s break if they are
allowed to freeze.
Considering CH OH, C H, Xe, and (CH) N, which can form hydrog en bonds with themselves? Draw the hydrogen-bonded
structures.
Given: compounds
Asked for: formation of hydrogen bonds and structure
Strategy:
A. Identify the compounds with a hydrogen atom attached to O, N, or F. These are likely to be able to act as hydrogen bond
donors.Example
3 2 6 3 3

8.1.2.8 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170077B. Of the compounds that can act as hydrogen bond donors, identify those that also contain lone pairs of electr ons, which
allow them to be hydrogen bond acceptors. If a substance is b oth a hydrogen donor and a hydrogen bond acceptor, dra w a
structure showing the hydrogen bonding.
Solution:
A Of the species listed, xenon (Xe), ethane (C H), and trim ethylamine [(CH) N] do not contain a hydrogen atom at tached to
O, N, or F; hence they cannot act as hydrogen bond donors.
B The one compound that can act as a hydrogen bond d onor, methanol (CH OH), contains both a hydrogen atom att ached to O
(making it a hydrogen bond donor) and two lone pairs of electrons on O (making it a hydrogen bond accepto r); methanol can
thus form hydrogen bonds by acting as either a hydr ogen bond donor or a hydrogen bond acceptor. The hyd rogen-bonded
structure of methanol is as follows:
Considering CH CO H, (CH) N, NH, and CH F, which can form h ydrogen bonds with themselves? Draw the hydrogenbonded structures.
Answer
CH CO H and NH;
Although hydrogen bonds are significantly weaker than covalent bonds, with typical dissociation energies of only 15–25 kJ/mol,
they have a significant influence on the physical pr operties of a compound. Compounds such as HF can form o nly two hydrogen
bonds at a time as can, on average, pure liquid NH. C onsequently, even though their molecular masses are sim ilar to that of water,
their boiling points are significantly lower than the boil ing point of water, which forms four hydrogen bonds at a time.2 6 3 3
Exercise
3 2 3 3 3 3
3 2 3

8.1.2.9 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170077Arrange C (buckminsterfullerene, which has a cage structure), NaCl, He, Ar, and N O in order of increasing boiling points.
Given: compounds
Asked for: order of increasing boiling points
Strategy:
Identify the intermolecular forces in each compound and then arrange the compounds according to the st rength of those forces.
The substance with the weakest forces will have the lowest bo iling point.
Solution:
Electrostatic interactions are strongest for an ioni c compound, so we expect NaCl to have the highest boil ing point. To predict
the relative boiling points of the other compounds, we must consider their polarity (for dipole–dipole in teractions), their ability
to form hydrogen bonds, and their molar mass (for Lo ndon dispersion forces). Helium is nonpolar and by f ar the lightest, so it
should have the lowest boiling point. Argon and N O have very similar molar masses (40 and 44 g/mol, respect ively), but N O
is polar while Ar is not. Consequently, N O should have a higher boiling point. A C molecule is nonpolar, but its molar mass
is 720 g/mol, much greater than that of Ar or N O. Beca use the boiling points of nonpolar substances increase rapidly with
molecular mass, C should boil at a higher temperature than the other nonionic substances. The predicted ord er is thus as
follows, with actual boiling points in parentheses:
He (−269°C) < Ar (−185.7°C) < N O (−88.5°C) < C (>280°C) < NaCl (1465°C).
Arrange 2,4-dimethylheptane, Ne, CS, Cl, and KBr in order of d ecreasing boiling points.
Answer
KBr (1435°C) > 2,4-dimethylheptane (132.9°C) > CS (46.6 °C) > Cl (−34.6°C) > Ne (−246°C)
Identify the most significant intermolecular force in each substance.
a. C H
b. CH OH
c. H S
Solution
a. Although C–H bonds are polar, they are only minimall y polar. The most significant intermolecular force f or this substance
would be dispersion forces.
b. This molecule has an H atom bonded to an O atom, so it wil l experience hydrogen bonding.
c. Although this molecule does not experience hydrogen bonding, the Lewis electron dot diagram and VSEPR indica te that it is
bent, so it has a permanent dipole. The most significant f orce in this substance is dipole-dipole interaction.
Identify the most significant intermolecular force in each substance.
a. HF
b. HCl
Answer a
hydrogen bondingExample: Buckyballs
60 2
2 2
2 60
2 60
Exercise
2 2
2 2
Example:
3 8
Exercise

8.1.2.10 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170077Answer b
dipole-dipole interactions
Summary
Molecules in liquids and solids are held to other mol ecules by intermolecular interactions, which are weake r than the
intramolecular interactions that hold the atoms toge ther within molecules and polyatomic ions. Transition s between the solid and
liquid or the liquid and gas phases are due to chang es in intermolecular interactions but do not affect intramolecular interactions.
The three major types of intermolecular interaction s are dipole–dipole interactions, London dispersion f orces (these two are often
referred to collectively as van der Waals forces), and hydrogen bonds. Dipole–dipole interactions arise from the electrostatic
interactions of the positive and negative ends of m olecules with permanent dipole moments; their strengt h is proportional to the
magnitude of the dipole moment and decreases as the d istance between dipoles increases. London dispersion forces are due to the
formation of instantaneous dipole moments in polar or nonpolar molecules as a result of short- lived fluctuations of electron
charge distribution, which in turn cause the temporar y formation of an induced dipole in adjacent molecules. Larger atoms tend to
be more polarizable than smaller ones because their outer electrons are less tightly bound and are therefore more easily per turbed.
Hydrogen bonds are especially strong dipole–dipole interactions b etween molecules that have hydrogen bonded to a highl y
electronegative atom, such as O, N, or F. The resulting partially positively charged H atom on one molecule (the hydrogen bond
donor) can interact strongly with a lone pair of electron s of a partially negatively charged O, N, or F atom on adjacent molecules
(the hydrogen bond acceptor). Because of strong O ⋅⋅⋅H hydrogen bonding between water molecules, water has an unusually high
boiling point, and ice has an open, cagelike structure th at is less dense than liquid water.
8.1.2: Intermolecular Forces is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

8.1.3.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1700788.1.3: Properties of Liquids
To describe the unique properties of liquids: surface te nsion, capillary action, and viscosity.
To know how and why the vapor pressure of a liquid varies wit h temperature.
To understand that the equilibrium vapor pressure of a l iquid depends on the temperature and the intermolecula r forces
present.
Although you have been introduced to some of the int eractions that hold molecules together in a liquid, we have not yet discussed
the consequences of those interactions for the bulk properties of liquids. We now turn our attention to prope rties of liquids that
intimately depend on the nature of intermolecular inte ractions:
surface tension,
capillary action,
viscosity, and
vapor pressure.
Surface Tension
If liquids tend to adopt the shapes of their contain ers, then, do small amounts of water on a freshly waxed car form raised droplets
instead of a thin, continuous film? The answer lies in a property called surface tension, which depends on intermolecular forces.
Surface tension is the energy required to increase th e surface area of a liquid by a unit amount and var ies greatly from liquid to
liquid based on the nature of the intermolecular fo rces, e.g., water with hydrogen bonds has a surface tensi on of 7.29 x 10 J/m (at
20°C), while mercury with metallic bonds has as surface tension that is 15 times higher: 4.86 x 10 J/m (at 20°C).
Figure presents a microscopic view of a liquid drople t. A typical molecule in the interior of the droplet is surrounded by
other molecules that exert attractive forces from al l directions. Consequently, there is no net force on the molecule that would cause
it to move in a particular direction. In contrast, a molecule on the surface experiences a net attraction toward the drop because t here
are no molecules on the outside to balance the force s exerted by adjacent molecules in the interior. Beca use a sphere has the
smallest possible surface area for a given volume, int ermolecular attractive interactions between water mol ecules cause the droplet
to adopt a spherical shape. This maximizes the number of attractive interactions and minimizes the number of water molecules at
the surface. Hence raindrops are almost spherical, and drops of water on a waxed (nonpolar) surface, which does not interact
strongly with water, form round beads. A dirty car is covered with a mixture of substances, some of which are polar. Attractive
interactions between the polar substances and water cause t he water to spread out into a thin film instead of forming b eads.
Figure: A Representation of Surface Tension in a Liquid. Molecules at the surface of water experience a net attraction to
other molecules in the liquid, which holds the surface of the bulk sample together. In contrast, those in th e interior experience
uniform attractive forces.
The same phenomenon holds molecules together at the surface of a bulk sample of water, almost as if they formed a skin. When
filling a glass with water, the glass can be overfilled so that the level of the liquid actually extends above the rim. Similarly, a
sewing needle or a paper clip can be placed on the su rface of a glass of water where it “floats,” even thou gh steel is much denserLearning Objectives
-2 2
-1 2

8.1.3.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170078than water. Many insects take advantage of this proper ty to walk on the surface of puddles or ponds without s inking. This is even
observable in the zero gravity conditions of space a s shown in Figure (and more so in the video link) wher e water wrung
from a wet towel continues to float along the towel's surfac e!
Figure: The Effects of the High Surface Tension of Liquid Water. The full video can be found at
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9jB7rOC5kG8.
Such phenomena are manifestations of surface tension, which is defined as the energy required to increase t he surface area of a
liquid by a specific amount. Surface tension is there fore measured as energy per unit area, such as joules p er square meter (J/m) or
dyne per centimeter (dyn/cm), where 1 dyn = 1 × 10 N. The values of the surface tension of some representa tive liquids are listed
in Table. Note the correlation between the surface t ension of a liquid and the strength of the intermole cular forces: the
stronger the intermolecular forces, the higher the sur face tension. For example, water, with its strong interm olecular hydrogen
bonding, has one of the highest surface tension values of any liquid, whereas low-boiling-point organic molec ules, which have
relatively weak intermolecular forces, have much lowe r surface tensions. Mercury is an apparent anomaly, but its very high surface
tension is due to the presence of strong metallic bonding.
Table: Surface Tension, Viscosity, Vapor Pressure (at 25° C Unless Otherwise Indicated), and Normal Boiling Poin ts of Common Liquids
SubstanceSurface Tension (× 10
J/m)Viscosity (mPa•s)Vapor Pressure
(mmHg)Normal Boiling Point
(°C)
Organic Compounds
diethyl ether 17 0.22 531 34.6
n-hexane 18 0.30 149 68.7
acetone 23 0.31 227 56.5
ethanol 22 1.07 59 78.3
ethylene glycol 48 16.1 ~0.08 198.9
Liquid Elements
bromine 41 0.94 218 58.8
mercury 486 1.53 0.0020 357
Water
0°C 75.6 1.79 4.6 —
20°C 72.8 1.00 17.5 —
60°C 66.2 0.47 149 —
100°C 58.9 0.28 760 —2
−5
−3

8.1.3.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170078Adding soaps and detergents that disrupt the intermolec ular attractions between adjacent water molecules can reduce the surface
tension of water. Because they affect the surface prop erties of a liquid, soaps and detergents are called sur face-active agents, or
surfactants. In the 1960s, US Navy researchers developed a method of fighting fires aboard aircraft carriers using “foams,” which
are aqueous solutions of fluorinated surfactants. The surfactants reduce the surface tension of water belo w that of fuel, so the
fluorinated solution is able to spread across the bur ning surface and extinguish the fire. Such foams are now used universally to
fight large-scale fires of organic liquids.
Capillary Action
Intermolecular forces also cause a phenomenon called capillary action, which is the tendency of a polar l iquid to rise against
gravity into a small-diameter tube (a capillary), as shown in Figure. When a glass capillary is is pla ced in liquid water, water
rises up into the capillary. The height to which the water rises depends on the diameter of the tube and the temperature of the water
but not on the angle at which the tube enters the water. The small er the diameter, the higher the liquid rises.
Figure: The Phenomenon of Capillary Action. Capillary action s een as water climbs to different levels in glass tubes of
different diameters. Credit: Dr. Clay Robinson, PhD, West Te xas A&M University.
Cohesive forces bind molecules of the same type togeth er
Adhesive forces bind a substance to a surface
Capillary action is the net result of two opposing se ts of forces: cohesive forces, which are the intermole cular forces that hold a
liquid together, and adhesive forces, which are the attractive forces between a liquid and the substance that composes the capillary.
Water has both strong adhesion to glass, which contai ns polar SiOH groups, and strong intermolecular cohesion. When a glass
capillary is put into water, the surface tension due t o cohesive forces constricts the surface area of water wi thin the tube, while
adhesion between the water and the glass creates an upwa rd force that maximizes the amount of glass surface in contact with the
water. If the adhesive forces are stronger than the co hesive forces, as is the case for water, then the liqui d in the capillary rises to
the level where the downward force of gravity exactly balances this upward force. If, however, the cohesive f orces are stronger
than the adhesive forces, as is the case for mercury a nd glass, the liquid pulls itself down into the capi llary below the surface of the
bulk liquid to minimize contact with the glass (Figur e). The upper surface of a liquid in a tube is calle d the meniscus, and the
shape of the meniscus depends on the relative strength s of the cohesive and adhesive forces. In liquids su ch as water, the meniscus
is concave; in liquids such as mercury, however, which h ave very strong cohesive forces and weak adhesion to glass, the meniscus
is convex (Figure).
Figure: The Phenomenon of Capillary Action. Capillary action of water compared to mercury, in each case with respect to a
polar surface such as glass. Differences in the relative str engths of cohesive and adhesive forces result in differ ent meniscus shapes
for mercury (left) and water (right) in glass tubes. (cre dit: Mark Ott)

8.1.3.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170078Polar substances are drawn up a glass capillary and generally have a concave meniscus.
Fluids and nutrients are transported up the stems of p lants or the trunks of trees by capillary action. Pl ants contain tiny rigid tubes
composed of cellulose, to which water has strong adhesio n. Because of the strong adhesive forces, nutrients can be transported
from the roots to the tops of trees that are more th an 50 m tall. Cotton towels are also made of cellulose; they absorb water because
the tiny tubes act like capillaries and “wick” the wa ter away from your skin. The moisture is absorbed by the entire fabric, not just
the layer in contact with your body.
Viscosity
Viscosity (η) is the resistance of a liquid to flow. Some liquids, such as gasoline, ethanol, and water, flow v ery readily and hence
have a low viscosity. Others, such as motor oil, molasses, and maple syrup, f low very slowly and have a high viscosity. The two
most common methods for evaluating the viscosity of a liquid are (1) to measure the time it takes for a quantity of liquid to flow
through a narrow vertical tube and (2) to measure th e time it takes steel balls to fall through a given volume of the liquid. The
higher the viscosity, the slower the liquid flows thro ugh the tube and the steel balls fall. Viscosity is ex pressed in units of the poise
(mPa•s); the higher the number, the higher the viscosi ty. The viscosities of some representative liquids are listed in Table 11.3.1 and
show a correlation between viscosity and intermolecul ar forces. Because a liquid can flow only if the mol ecules can move past one
another with minimal resistance, strong intermolecular attractive forces make it more difficult for molec ules to move with respect
to one another. The addition of a second hydroxyl gr oup to ethanol, for example, which produces ethylene g lycol
(HOCH CH OH), increases the viscosity 15-fold. This effect is d ue to the increased number of hydrogen bonds that ca n form
between hydroxyl groups in adjacent molecules, resultin g in dramatically stronger intermolecular attractive fo rces.
There is also a correlation between viscosity and mol ecular shape. Liquids consisting of long, flexible m olecules tend to have
higher viscosities than those composed of more sphe rical or shorter-chain molecules. The longer the mole cules, the easier it is for
them to become “tangled” with one another, making it more difficult for them to move past one another. London dispersion forces
also increase with chain length. Due to a combination of these two effects, long-chain hydrocarbons (such as mo tor oils) are highly
viscous.
Viscosity increases as intermolecular interactions or molecular size increase s.
Motor oils and other lubricants demonstrate the prac tical importance of controlling viscosity. The oil i n an automobile engine
must effectively lubricate under a wide range of con ditions, from subzero starting temperatures to the 200 °C that oil can reach
in an engine in the heat of the Mojave Desert in Augus t. Viscosity decreases rapidly with increasing tempera tures because the
kinetic energy of the molecules increases, and higher kinetic energy enables the molecules to overcome th e attractive forces
that prevent the liquid from flowing. As a result, an o il that is thin enough to be a good lubricant in a c old engine will become
too “thin” (have too low a viscosity) to be effective at hig h temperatures.2 2
Application: Motor Oils

8.1.3.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170078
Figure: Oil being drained from a car
The viscosity of motor oils is described by an SAE (Soc iety of Automotive Engineers) rating ranging from SAE 5 to SAE 50
for engine oils: the lower the number, the lower the vi scosity (Figure). So-called single-grade oils can cause major
problems. If they are viscous enough to work at high o perating temperatures (SAE 50, for example), then at lo w temperatures,
they can be so viscous that a car is difficult to sta rt or an engine is not properly lubricated. Consequen tly, most modern oils are
multigrade, with designations such as SAE 20W/50 (a grade used in h igh-performance sports cars), in which case the oil has
the viscosity of an SAE 20 oil at subzero temperature s (hence the W for winter) and the viscosity of an SAE 50 oil at high
temperatures. These properties are achieved by a care ful blend of additives that modulate the intermolecu lar interactions in the
oil, thereby controlling the temperature dependence of the viscosity. Many of the commercially available oil additives “for
improved engine performance” are highly viscous mate rials that increase the viscosity and effective SAE ra ting of the oil, but
overusing these additives can cause the same problems ex perienced with highly viscous single-grade oils.
Based on the nature and strength of the intermolecu lar cohesive forces and the probable nature of the l iquid–glass adhesive
forces, predict what will happen when a glass capillary i s put into a beaker of SAE 20 motor oil. Will the oil be pulled up into
the tube by capillary action or pushed down below the surface of the liquid in the beaker? What will be th e shape of the
meniscus (convex or concave)? (Hint: the surface of glas s is lined with Si–OH groups.)
Given: substance and composition of the glass surface
Asked for: behavior of oil and the shape of meniscus
Strategy:
A. Identify the cohesive forces in the motor oil.
B. Determine whether the forces interact with the surface of glass. From the strength of this interaction, predict the behavior of
the oil and the shape of the meniscus.
Solution
A Motor oil is a nonpolar liquid consisting largely o f hydrocarbon chains. The cohesive forces responsible f or its high boiling
point are almost solely London dispersion forces between the hydrocarbon chains.
B Such a liquid cannot form strong interactions with t he polar Si–OH groups of glass, so the surface of the o il inside the
capillary will be lower than the level of the liquid in the be aker. The oil will have a convex meniscus similar to that of mercury.
Predict what will happen when a glass capillary is put i nto a beaker of ethylene glycol. Will the ethylene g lycol be pulled up
into the tube by capillary action or pushed down belo w the surface of the liquid in the beaker? What will be the shape of the
meniscus (convex or concave)?
Answer
Capillary action will pull the ethylene glycol up into the capillary. The meniscus will be concave.Example
Exercise

8.1.3.6 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170078Evaporation and Condensation
Because the molecules of a liquid are in constant mo tion, we can plot the fraction of molecules with a gi ven kinetic energy (KE)
against their kinetic energy to obtain the kinetic energy distribution of the molecules in the liquid (Figure), just as we did for
a gas. As for gases, increasing the temperature increas es both the average kinetic energy of the particles in a liquid and the range of
kinetic energy of the individual molecules. If we assu me that a minimum amount of energy () is needed to overcome the
intermolecular attractive forces that hold a liquid together, then some fraction of molecules in the liqu id always has a kinetic energy
greater than. The fraction of molecules with a kine tic energy greater than this minimum value increase s with increasing
temperature. Any molecule with a kinetic energy greate r than has enough energy to overcome the forces hol ding it in the liquid
and escape into the vapor phase. Before it can do so, however, a molecule must also be at the surface of t he liquid, where it is
physically possible for it to leave the liquid surfac e; that is, only molecules at the surface can underg o evaporation (or
vaporization), where molecules gain sufficient energy to enter a gaseous state above a liquid’s surface, t hereby creating a vapor
pressure.
Figure: The Distribution of the Kinetic Energies of t he Molecules of a Liquid at Two Temperatures. Just as wi th gases,
increasing the temperature shifts the peak to a higher energy and broadens the curve. Only molecules with a kinetic energy greater
than E can escape from the liquid to enter the vapor phase, and the proportion of molecules with KE > E is greater at the higher
temperature.
To understand the causes of vapor pressure, consider t he apparatus shown in Figure. When a liquid is introd uced into an
evacuated chamber (part (a) in Figure), the initial pressure above the liquid is approximately zero beca use there are as yet no
molecules in the vapor phase. Some molecules at the sur face, however, will have sufficient kinetic energy to e scape from the liquid
and form a vapor, thus increasing the pressure inside the container. As long as the temperature of the li quid is held constant, the
fraction of molecules with will not change, and the r ate at which molecules escape from the liquid into th e vapor phase
will depend only on the surface area of the liquid phase.0 0

8.1.3.7 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170078
Figure: Vapor Pressure. (a) When a liquid is introduced into an evacuated chamber, molecules with sufficient kinetic energy
escape from the surface and enter the vapor phase, cau sing the pressure in the chamber to increase. (b) When sufficient molecules
are in the vapor phase for a given temperature, the rate of condensation equals the rate of evaporation (a steady state is reached),
and the pressure in the container becomes constant.
As soon as some vapor has formed, a fraction of the mol ecules in the vapor phase will collide with the surfa ce of the liquid and
reenter the liquid phase in a process known as condens ation (part (b) in Figure). As the number of molecul es in the vapor
phase increases, the number of collisions between vap or-phase molecules and the surface will also increase. Eventually, a steady
state will be reached in which exactly as many molecules p er unit time leave the surface of the liquid (vapor ize) as collide with it
(condense). At this point, the pressure over the liqu id stops increasing and remains constant at a particul ar value that is
characteristic of the liquid at a given temperature. The rates of evaporation and condensation over tim e for a system such as this are
shown graphically in Figure.
Figure: The Relative Rates of Evaporation and Conden sation as a Function of Time after a Liquid Is Introduc ed into a
Sealed Chamber. The rate of evaporation depends only on the surface area of the liquid and is essentially co nstant. The rate of
condensation depends on the number of molecules in the vapor phase and increases steadily until it equals the rate of evaporation.
Equilibrium Vapor Pressure
Two opposing processes (such as evaporation and condensa tion) that occur at the same rate and thus produce n o net change in a
system, constitute a dynamic equilibrium. In the case o f a liquid enclosed in a chamber, the molecules conti nuously evaporate and
condense, but the amounts of liquid and vapor do not change with time. The pressure exerted by a vapor in dynamic equilibrium
with a liquid is the equilibrium vapor pressure of the liquid.
If a liquid is in an open container, however, most of the molecules that esca pe into the vapor phase will not collide with the surface
of the liquid and return to the liquid phase. Inste ad, they will diffuse through the gas phase away from th e container, and an
equilibrium will never be established. Under these cond itions, the liquid will continue to evaporate until it has “disappeared.” The
speed with which this occurs depends on the vapor pre ssure of the liquid and the temperature. V olatile li quids have relatively high
vapor pressures and tend to evaporate readily; nonvol atile liquids have low vapor pressures and evaporate more slowly. Although
the dividing line between volatile and nonvolatile l iquids is not clear-cut, as a general guideline, we can say that substances with

8.1.3.8 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170078vapor pressures greater than that of water (Figure) a re relatively volatile, whereas those with vapor press ures less than that
of water are relatively nonvolatile. Thus diethyl eth er (ethyl ether), acetone, and gasoline are volatile, but mercury, ethylene glycol,
and motor oil are nonvolatile.
Figure: The Vapor Pressures of Several Liquids as a Function of Temperature. The point at which the vapor pressur e curve
crosses the P = 1 atm line (dashed) is the normal boiling point of the liquid.
The equilibrium vapor pressure of a substance at a p articular temperature is a characteristic of the mate rial, like its molecular mass,
melting point, and boiling point (Table 11.4). It doe s not depend on the amount of liquid as long as at least a tiny amount of liquid
is present in equilibrium with the vapor. The equili brium vapor pressure does, however, depend very strong ly on the temperature
and the intermolecular forces present, as shown for se veral substances in Figure. Molecules that can hydrog en bond, such as
ethylene glycol, have a much lower equilibrium vapor pressure than those that cannot, such as octane. The n onlinear increase in
vapor pressure with increasing temperature is much steeper than the increase in pressure expected for an ideal gas over the
corresponding temperature range. The temperature depe ndence is so strong because the vapor pressure depend s on the fraction of
molecules that have a kinetic energy greater than t hat needed to escape from the liquid, and this fractio n increases exponentially
with temperature. As a result, sealed containers of v olatile liquids are potential bombs if subjected to la rge increases in temperature.
The gas tanks on automobiles are vented, for example, so that a car won’t explode when parked in the sun. Si milarly, the small cans
(1–5 gallons) used to transport gasoline are required by l aw to have a pop-off pressure release.
Volatile substances have low boiling points and relatively weak intermolecul ar
interactions; nonvolatile substances have high boiling points and relatively strong
intermolecular interactions.
Boiling Points
As the temperature of a liquid increases, the vapor p ressure of the liquid increases until it equals the external pressure, or the
atmospheric pressure in the case of an open container. Bubbles of vapor begin to form throughout the liqui d, and the liquid begins
to boil. The temperature at which a liquid boils at e xactly 1 atm pressure is the normal boiling point o f the liquid. For water, the
normal boiling point is exactly 100°C. The normal b oiling points of the other liquids in Figure are re presented by the points
at which the vapor pressure curves cross the line cor responding to a pressure of 1 atm. Although we usually c ite the normal boiling
point of a liquid, the actual boiling point depends on the pressure. At a pressure greater than 1 atm, water boils at a temperature
greater than 100°C because the increased pressure for ces vapor molecules above the surface to condense. Hence the molecules
must have greater kinetic energy to escape from the surfa ce. Conversely, at pressures less than 1 atm, water boils be low 100°C.
Table: The Boiling Points of Water at Various Locati ons on Earth

8.1.3.9 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170078Place Altitude above Sea Level (ft) Atmospheric Pressure (m mHg) Boiling Point of Water (°C)
Mt. Everest, Nepal/Tibet 29,028 240 70
Bogota, Colombia 11,490 495 88
Denver, Colorado 5280 633 95
Washington, DC 25 759 100
Dead Sea, Israel/Jordan −1312 799 101.4
Typical variations in atmospheric pressure at sea le vel are relatively small, causing only minor changes in the boiling point of
water. For example, the highest recorded atmospheric p ressure at sea level is 813 mmHg, recorded during a Sibe rian winter; the
lowest sea-level pressure ever measured was 658 mmHg in a Pacifi c typhoon. At these pressures, the boiling point of water chan ges
minimally, to 102°C and 96°C, respectively. At high alt itudes, on the other hand, the dependence of the bo iling point of water on
pressure becomes significant. Table lists the boil ing points of water at several locations with differen t altitudes. At an
elevation of only 5000 ft, for example, the boiling point of water is already lower than the lowest ever re corded at sea level. The
lower boiling point of water has major consequences for cooking everything from soft-boiled eggs (a “three-m inute egg” may well
take four or more minutes in the Rockies and even lo nger in the Himalayas) to cakes (cake mixes are often sold with separate highaltitude instructions). Conversely, pressure cooker s, which have a seal that allows the pressure inside the m to exceed 1 atm, are
used to cook food more rapidly by raising the boiling poi nt of water and thus the temperature at which the food is b eing cooked.
As pressure increases, the boiling point of a liquid increases and vice versa.
Use Figure to estimate the following.
a. the boiling point of water in a pressure cooker operatin g at 1000 mmHg
b. the pressure required for mercury to boil at 250°C
Mercury boils at 356 °C at room pressure. To see video go to https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0iizsbXWYoo
Given: Data in Figure, pressure, and boiling point
Asked for: corresponding boiling point and pressure
Strategy:
A. To estimate the boiling point of water at 1000 mmHg, refe r to Figure and find the point where the vapor pressure
curve of water intersects the line corresponding to a pressur e of 1000 mmHg.
B. To estimate the pressure required for mercury to boil a t 250°C, find the point where the vapor pressure curve of mercury
intersects the line corresponding to a temperature of 250° C.
Solution:
a. A The vapor pressure curve of water intersects the P = 1000 mmHg line at about 110°C; this is therefore the boili ng point
of water at 1000 mmHg.
b. B The vertical line corresponding to 250°C intersects th e vapor pressure curve of mercury at P ≈ 75 mmHg. Hence this is
the pressure required for mercury to boil at 250°C.Example: Boiling Mercury

8.1.3.10 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170078Ethylene glycol is an organic compound primarily us ed as a raw material in the manufacture of polyester f ibers and fabric
industry, and polyethylene terephthalate resins (PET) us ed in bottling. Use the data in Figure to estimate the f ollowing.
a. the normal boiling point of ethylene glycol
b. the pressure required for diethyl ether to boil at 20° C.
Answer a
200°C
Answer b
450 mmHg
Summary
Surface tension, capillary action, and viscosity are un ique properties of liquids that depend on the natur e of intermolecular
interactions. Surface tension is the energy required to increase the surface are a of a liquid by a given amount. The stronger the
intermolecular interactions, the greater the surfac e tension. Surfactants are molecules, such as soaps and detergents, that red uce
the surface tension of polar liquids like water. Capillary action is the phenomenon in which liquids rise up into a n arrow tube
called a capillary. It results when cohesive forces, the intermolecular forces in the liquid, are weaker than adhesive forces, the
attraction between a liquid and the surface of the c apillary. The shape of the meniscus, the upper surface of a liquid in a tube, also
reflects the balance between adhesive and cohesive for ces. The viscosity of a liquid is its resistance to flow. Liquids that have
strong intermolecular forces tend to have high viscosi ties.
Because the molecules of a liquid are in constant mo tion and possess a wide range of kinetic energies, at any moment some fraction
of them has enough energy to escape from the surface of the liquid to enter the gas or vapor phase. This p rocess, called
vaporization or evaporation, generates a vapor pressure above the liquid. Molecules in the gas phase can c ollide with the liquid
surface and reenter the liquid via condensation. Eventually, a steady state is reached in which the number of molecules
evaporating and condensing per unit time is the sam e, and the system is in a state of dynamic equilibrium. Under these conditions,
a liquid exhibits a characteristic equilibrium vapor pressure that depends only on the temperature. Volatile liquids are liquids
with high vapor pressures, which tend to evaporate readi ly from an open container; nonvolatile liquids have low vapor pressures.
When the vapor pressure equals the external pressure, bubbles of vapor form within the liquid, and it boil s. The temperature at
which a substance boils at a pressure of 1 atm is its normal boiling point.
8.1.3: Properties of Liquids is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.Exercise: Boiling Ethlyene Glycol

8.1.4.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1700838.1.4: Properties of Solids
To understand the correlation between bonding and the properties of solids.
To classify solids as ionic, molecular, covalent (network), or metallic, where the general order of increasing stren gth of
interactions.
Crystalline solids fall into one of four categories. All four categories involve packing discrete molecul es or atoms into a lattice or
repeating array, though network solids are a special case. The categories are distinguishe d by the nature of the interactions holding
the discrete molecules or atoms together. Based on the nature of the forces that hold the component at oms, molecules, or ions
together, solids may be formally classified as ionic, molecular, covalent (network), or metallic. The variat ion in the relative
strengths of these four types of interactions correlates nicely with their wide variation in properties.
Table: Solids may be formally classified as ionic, mole cular, covalent (network), or metallic
Type of Solid Interaction Properties Examples
Ionic IonicHigh Melting Point, Brittle,
HardNaCl, MgO
MolecularHydrogen Bonding,
Dipole-Dipole,
London DispersionLow Melting Point,
NonconductingH, CO
Metallic Metallic BondingVariable Hardness and Melting
Point (depending upon strength
of metallic bonding),
ConductingFe, Mg
Network Covalent BondingHigh Melting Point, Hard,
NonconductingC (diamond),
SiO (quartz)
In ionic and molecular solids, there are no chemica l bonds between the molecules, atoms, or ions. The soli d consists of discrete
chemical species held together by intermolecular fo rces that are electrostatic or Coulombic in nature. This behavior is most
obvious for an ionic solid such as, where the positive ly charged Na ions are attracted to the negatively c harged ions.
Even in the absence of ions, however, electrostatic for ces are operational. For polar molecules such as, t he positively
charged region of one molecule is attracted to the negatively charged region of another molecule (dipo le-dipole interactions). For a
nonpolar molecule such as, which has no permanent d ipole moment, the random motion of electrons gives r ise to temporary
polarity (a temporary dipole moment). Electrostatic attractions between two temporarily polarized molecul es are called London
Dispersion Forces.
Hydrogen bonding is a term describing an attractive i nteraction between a hydrogen atom from a molecule o r a molecular fragment
X–H in which X is more electronegative than H, and an ato m or a group of atoms in the same or a different mo lecule, in which
there is evidence of bond formation. (See the IUPAC Pro visional Recommendation on the definition of a hydro gen bond.) Dots are
employed to indicate the presence of a hydrogen bon d: X–H•••Y. The attractive interaction in a hydrogen bond typically has a
strong electrostatic contribution, but dispersion force s and weak covalent bonding are also present.
In metallic solids and network solids, however, chemica l bonds hold the individual chemical subunits togeth er. The crystal is
essential a single, macroscopic molecule with continu ous chemical bonding throughout the entire structure. In metallic solids, the
valence electrons are no longer exclusively associat ed with a single atom. Instead these electrons exist in molecular orbitals that are
delocalized over many atoms, producing an electronic band structure. The metallic crystal essentially co nsists of a set of metal
cations in a sea of electrons. This type of chemical bondi ng is called metallic bonding.Learning Objectives
2 2

8.1.4.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170083Ionic Solids
You learned previously that an ionic solid consists of positively and negatively charged ions held togeth er by electrostatic forces.
The strength of the attractive forces depends on th e charge and size of the ions that compose the lattice and determines many of the
physical properties of the crystal.
The lattice energy (i.e., the energy required to separate 1 mol of a cry stalline ionic solid into its component ions in the gas phase)
is directly proportional to the product of the ioni c charges and inversely proportional to the sum of the radii of the ions. For
example, NaF and CaO both crystallize in the face-cent ered cubic (fcc) sodium chloride structure, and the sizes of their component
ions are about the same: Na (102 pm) versus Ca (100 p m), and F (133 pm) versus O (140 pm). Because of the h igher charge
on the ions in CaO, however, the lattice energy of CaO is almost four times greater than that of NaF (3401 kJ /mol versus 923
kJ/mol). The forces that hold Ca and O together in C aO are much stronger than those that hold Na and F tog ether in NaF, so the
heat of fusion of CaO is almost twice that of NaF (59 kJ /mol versus 33.4 kJ/mol), and the melting point of CaO is 2927°C versus
996°C for NaF. In both cases, however, the values are large; that is, simple ionic compounds have high me lting points and are
relatively hard (and brittle) solids.
Molecular Solids
Molecular solids consist of atoms or molecules held t o each other by dipole–dipole interactions, London dispersion forces, or
hydrogen bonds, or any combination of these. The arrangem ent of the molecules in solid benzene is as follows:
The structure of solid benzene. In solid benzene, the molecules are not arranged with their planes parallel to one another but at 90°
angles. (CC BY-NC-SA; Anonymous by request).
Because the intermolecular interactions in a molecu lar solid are relatively weak compared with ionic and covalent bonds, molecular
solids tend to be soft, low melting, and easily vaporiz ed (and are low). For similar substances, the strengt h of the
London dispersion forces increases smoothly with inc reasing molecular mass. For example, the melting point s of benzene (C H),
naphthalene (C H), and anthracene (C H), with one, two, a nd three fused aromatic rings, are 5.5°C, 80.2°C, and 215°C,
respectively. The enthalpies of fusion also increase smoothly within the series: benzene (9.95 kJ/mol) < naphthalene (19.1 kJ/mol)
< anthracene (28.8 kJ/mol). If the molecules have s hapes that cannot pack together efficiently in the crystal, however, then the
melting points and the enthalpies of fusion tend to be unexpectedly low because the molecules are unabl e to arrange themselves to
optimize intermolecular interactions. Thus toluene (C H CH) and m-xylene [m-C H (CH)] have melting points of −95°C and
−48°C, respectively, which are significantly lower than t he melting point of the lighter but more symmetrical ana log, benzene.
Self-healing rubber is an example of a molecular soli d with the potential for significant commercial appl ications. The material can
stretch, but when snapped into pieces it can bond bac k together again through reestablishment of its hyd rogen-bonding network
without showing any sign of weakness. Among other applica tions, it is being studied for its use in adhesives a nd bicycle tires that
will self-heal.
Toluene and m-xylene. The methyl groups attached to the phenyl ring in toluene and m-xylene prevent the rings from packing
together as in solid benzene. (CC BY-NC-SA; Anonymous by request).+ 2+ − 2−
6 6
10 8 14 10
6 5 3 6 4 3 2

8.1.4.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170083Covalent Network Solids
Covalent solids are formed by networks or chains of atoms or molecules held together by covalent bonds. A perfec t single crystal of
a covalent solid is therefore a single giant molecul e. For example, the structure of diamond, shown in part (a) in Figure,
consists of sp3 hybridized carbon atoms, each bonded t o four other carbon atoms in a tetrahedral array to create a giant network.
The carbon atoms form six-membered rings.
Figure: The Structures of Diamond and Graphite. (a) Diamond consists of sp3 hybridized carbon atoms, each bo nded to four
other carbon atoms. The tetrahedral array forms a gia nt network in which carbon atoms form six-membered ri ngs. (b) These side
(left) and top (right) views of the graphite structur e show the layers of fused six-membered rings and the ar rangement of atoms in
alternate layers of graphite. The rings in alternate layers are staggered, such that every other carbon ato m in one layer lies directly
under (and above) the center of a six-membered ring in an adjacent layer. (CC BY-NC-SA; Anonymous by req uest).
The unit cell of diamond can be described as an fcc array of carbon atoms with four additional carbon ato ms inserted into four of
the tetrahedral holes. It thus has the zinc blende structure described in Section 12.3, except that in z inc blende the atoms that
compose the fcc array are sulfur and the atoms in the tetrahedral holes are zinc. Elemental silicon has the same structure, as does
silicon carbide (SiC), which has alternating C and Si a toms. The structure of crystalline quartz (SiO), shown in Section 12.1, can
be viewed as being derived from the structure of silicon b y inserting an oxygen atom between each pair of silicon atoms.
All compounds with the diamond and related structures are hard, high-melting-point solids that are not e asily deformed. Instead,
they tend to shatter when subjected to large stresses, an d they usually do not conduct electricity very well. In fact, diamond
(melting point = 3500°C at 63.5 atm) is one of the h ardest substances known, and silicon carbide (melting p oint = 2986°C) is used
commercially as an abrasive in sandpaper and grindin g wheels. It is difficult to deform or melt these and re lated compounds
because strong covalent (C–C or Si–Si) or polar coval ent (Si–C or Si–O) bonds must be broken, which requires a large input of
energy.
Other covalent solids have very different structures. For example, graphite, the other common allotrope of carb on, has the structure
shown in part (b) in Figure. It contains planar netwo rks of six-membered rings of sp2 hybridized carbon at oms in which
each carbon is bonded to three others. This leaves a single electron in an unhybridized 2pz orbital tha t can be used to form C=C
double bonds, resulting in a ring with alternating d ouble and single bonds. Because of its resonance str uctures, the bonding in
graphite is best viewed as consisting of a network of C –C single bonds with one-third of a π bond holding th e carbons together,
similar to the bonding in benzene.
To completely describe the bonding in graphite, we n eed a molecular orbital approach similar to the one used for benzene in
Chapter 9. In fact, the C–C distance in graphite (14 1.5 pm) is slightly longer than the distance in benz ene (139.5 pm), consistent
with a net carbon–carbon bond order of 1.33. In graph ite, the two-dimensional planes of carbon atoms are s tacked to form a threedimensional solid; only London dispersion forces ho ld the layers together. As a result, graphite exhibits properties typical of both
covalent and molecular solids. Due to strong covalent bonding within the layers, graphite has a very high me lting point, as
expected for a covalent solid (it actually sublimes at about 3915°C). It is also very soft; the layers can e asily slide past one another
because of the weak interlayer interactions. Consequ ently, graphite is used as a lubricant and as the “l ead” in pencils; the friction
between graphite and a piece of paper is sufficient to leave a thin layer of carbon on the paper. Graphit e is unusual among covalent
solids in that its electrical conductivity is very high parallel to the planes of carbon atoms because of delocalized C–C π bonding.
Finally, graphite is black because it contains an imm ense number of alternating double bonds, which results in a very small energy
difference between the individual molecular orbitals. Thus light of virtually all wavelengths is absorbed. Diamond, on the other2

8.1.4.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170083hand, is colorless when pure because it has no delocal ized electrons. Table compares the strengths of th e intermolecular and
intramolecular interactions for three covalent solids, sh owing the comparative weakness of the interlayer interactio ns.
Table: A Comparison of Intermolecular (ΔH) and Intr amolecular Interactions
Substance ΔH (kJ/mol) Average Bond Energy (kJ/mol)
phosphorus (s) 58.98 201
sulfur (s) 64.22 226
iodine (s) 62.42 149
Carbon: An example of an Covalent Network Solid
In network solids, conventional chemical bonds hold th e chemical subunits together. The bonding between chem ical subunits,
however, is identical to that within the subunits, resul ting in a continuous network of chemical bonds. One c ommon examples of
network solids are diamond (a form of pure carbon) C arbon exists as a pure element at room temperature in three different forms:
graphite (the most stable form), diamond, and fullerene.
Diamonds
The structure of diamond is shown at the right in a "ball-and-stick" format. The balls represent the car bon atoms and the sticks
represent a covalent bond. Be aware that in the "ball- and-stick" representation the size of the balls do no t accurately represent the
size of carbon atoms. In addition, a single stick is dr awn to represent a covalent bond irrespective of wheth er the bond is a single,
double, or triple bond or requires resonance structur es to represent. In the diamond structure, all bonds are single covalent bonds (
bonds). The "space-filling" format is an alternate r epresentation that displays atoms as spheres with a ra dius equal to the van der
Waals radius, thus providing a better sense of the size of the atoms.
Figure: Rotating model of diamond cubic. Figure used with permission from Wikipedia
Notice that diamond is a network solid. The entire sol id is an "endless" repetition of carbon atoms bonde d to each other by covalent
bonds. (In the display at the right, the structure is trunca ted to fit in the display area.)
What is the bonding geometry around each carbon?
What is the hybridization of carbon in diamond?
The diamond structure consists of a repeating series of ring s. How many carbon atoms are in a ring?
Diamond are renowned for its hardness. Explain why this prope rty is expected on the basis of the structure of diamond.
Graphite
The most stable form of carbon is graphite. Graphite consists of sheets of carbon atoms covalently bonded together. These sheets
are then stacked to form graphite. Figure shows a ball -and-stick representation of graphite with sheets that extended
"indefinitely" in the xy plane, but the structure h as been truncated for display purposed. Graphite may a lso be regarded as a
network solid, even though there is no bonding in th e z direction. Each layer, however, is an "endless" bon ded network of carbon
atoms.sub
sub
Questions to consider

8.1.4.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170083
Figure: Animation of a rotating graphite structure. This is a stereogram and can be viewed in 3D if a view er's eyes are
crossed slightly to overlap the two panels. Images used w ith permission from Wikipedia.
What is the bonding geometry around each carbon?
What is the hybridization of carbon in graphite?
The a layer of the graphite structure consists of a rep eating series of rings. How many carbon atoms are in a ring?
What force holds the carbon sheets together in graphite?
Graphite is very slippery and is often used in lubricants. Explain why this property is expected on the basis of the structure
of graphite.
The slipperiness of graphite is enhanced by the introdu ction of impurities. Where would such impurities be located and why
would they make graphite a better lubricant?
Fullerenes
Until the mid 1980's, pure carbon was thought to exist in two forms: graphite and diamond. The discovery of C molecules in
interstellar dust in 1985 added a third form to this list. The existence of C, which resembles a soccer bal l, had been hypothesized
by theoreticians for many years. In the late 1980's synthetic methods were developed for the synthesis of C, and the ready
availability of this form of carbon led to extensive resea rch into its properties.
Figure: Example of fullerenes: a buckyball (on left and an extended bucktube. Images used with p ermission from
Wikipedia.
The C molecule (Figure; left), is called buckminste rfullerene, though the shorter name fullerene is oft en used. The name is
a tribute to the American architect R. Buckminster Ful ler, who is famous for designing and constructing geodesi c domes which
bear a close similarity to the structure of C. As is evident from the display, C is a sphere composed of six-member and fivemember carbon rings. These balls are sometimes fondl y referred to as "Bucky balls". It should be noted t hat fullerenes are an entire
class of pure carbon compounds rather than a single compound. A distorted sphere containing more than 60 carbon atoms have also
been found, and it is also possible to create long tubes (Fi gure; right). All of these substances are pure carbon.Questions to consider
60 60

8.1.4.6 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170083What is the bonding geometry around each carbon? (Note t hat this geometry is distorted in.)
What is the hybridization of carbon in fullerene?
A single crystal of C60 falls into which class of crysta lline solids?
It has been hypothesized that C60 would make a good lubric ant. Why might C60 make a good lubricant?
Metallic Solids
Metallic solids such as crystals of copper, aluminum, a nd iron are formed by metal atoms Figure. The struc ture of metallic
crystals is often described as a uniform distributio n of atomic nuclei within a “sea” of delocalized ele ctrons. The atoms within such
a metallic solid are held together by a unique forc e known as metallic bonding that gives rise to many useful and varied bulk
properties. All exhibit high thermal and electrical c onductivity, metallic luster, and malleability. Many a re very hard and quite
strong. Because of their malleability (the ability t o deform under pressure or hammering), they do not s hatter and, therefore, make
useful construction materials.
Metals are characterized by their ability to reflect light, called luster, their high electrical and ther mal conductivity, their high heat
capacity, and their malleability and ductility. Every lattice point in a pure metallic element is occupied by an atom of the same
metal. The packing efficiency in metallic crystals t ends to be high, so the resulting metallic solids are dense, with each atom having
as many as 12 nearest neighbors.
Figure: Copper is a metallic solid. (CC BY; OpenStax).
Bonding in metallic solids is quite different from th e bonding in the other kinds of solids we have discussed. Because all the atoms
are the same, there can be no ionic bonding, yet met als always contain too few electrons or valence orbital s to form covalent bonds
with each of their neighbors. Instead, the valence e lectrons are delocalized throughout the crystal, pr oviding a strong cohesive force
that holds the metal atoms together.
Valence electrons in a metallic solid are delocalized, providing a strong c ohesive force
that holds the atoms together.
The strength of metallic bonds varies dramatically. Fo r example, cesium melts at 28.4°C, and mercury is a li quid at room
temperature, whereas tungsten melts at 3680°C. Metallic bonds tend to be weakest for elements that have nearly empty (as in Cs)
or nearly full (Hg) valence subshells, and strongest f or elements with approximately half-filled valence sh ells (as in W). As a result,
the melting points of the metals increase to a maxim um around group 6 and then decrease again from left to right across the d
block. Other properties related to the strength of m etallic bonds, such as enthalpies of fusion, boiling points, and hardness, have
similar periodic trends.Questions to Consider

8.1.4.7 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170083
Figure: The Electron-Sea Model of Bonding in Metals. Fixed, positively charged metal nuclei from group 1 (a) or group 2
(b) are surrounded by a “sea” of mobile valence elect rons. Because a group 2 metal has twice the number of valence electrons as a
group 1 metal, it should have a higher melting point.
A somewhat oversimplified way to describe the bonding i n a metallic crystal is to depict the crystal as co nsisting of positively
charged nuclei in an electron sea (Figure). In this model, the valence electrons are not tightly bound to any one atom but are
distributed uniformly throughout the structure. Very little energy is needed to remove electrons from a solid metal because they are
not bound to a single nucleus. When an electrical pot ential is applied, the electrons can migrate through the solid toward the
positive electrode, thus producing high electrical conductivity. The ease with which metals can be deforme d under pressure is
attributed to the ability of the metal ions to chang e positions within the electron sea without breaking a ny specific bonds. The
transfer of energy through the solid by successive co llisions between the metal ions also explains the hig h thermal conductivity of
metals. This model does not, however, explain many of the other properties of metals, such as their metallic l uster and the observed
trends in bond strength as reflected in melting poin ts or enthalpies of fusion. Some general properties of the four major classes of
solids are summarized in Table.
Table: Properties of the Major Classes of Solids
Ionic Solids Molecular Solids Covalent Solids Metallic Solids
poor conductors of heat and
electricitypoor conductors of heat and
electricitypoor conductors of heat and
electricity*good conductors of heat and
electricity
relatively high melting point low melting point high melting pointmelting points depend strongly
on electron configuration
hard but brittle; shatter under
stresssoft very hard and brittleeasily deformed under stress;
ductile and malleable
relatively dense low density low density usually high densi ty
dull surface dull surface dull surface lustrous
*Many exceptions exist. For example, graphite has a rel atively high electrical conductivity within the car bon planes, and diamond has
the highest thermal conductivity of any known substanc e.
The general order of increasing strength of interacti ons in a solid is:
molecular solids < ionic solids ≈ metallic solids < covalent solids
Classify Ge, RbI, C (CH), and Zn as ionic, molecular, c ovalent, or metallic solids and arrange them in orde r of increasing
melting points.
Given: compounds
Asked for: classification and order of melting points
Strategy:Example
6 3 6

8.1.4.8 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170083A. Locate the component element(s) in the periodic table. Based on their positions, predict whether each solid is i onic,
molecular, covalent, or metallic.
B. Arrange the solids in order of increasing melting poi nts based on your classification, beginning with molecular s olids.
Solution:
A Germanium lies in the p block just under Si, along t he diagonal line of semimetallic elements, which sugg ests that elemental
Ge is likely to have the same structure as Si (the diam ond structure). Thus Ge is probably a covalent solid. RbI contains a metal
from group 1 and a nonmetal from group 17, so it is a n ionic solid containing Rb and I ions. The compoun d C6(CH3)6 is a
hydrocarbon (hexamethylbenzene), which consists of isol ated molecules that stack to form a molecular solid with no covalent
bonds between them. Zn is a d-block element, so it is a me tallic solid.
B Arranging these substances in order of increasing me lting points is straightforward, with one exception. We expect C (CH)
to have the lowest melting point and Ge to have the h ighest melting point, with RbI somewhere in between. The melting points
of metals, however, are difficult to predict based on the models presented thus far. Because Zn has a fille d valence shell, it
should not have a particularly high melting point, so a reasonable guess is C (CH) < Zn ~ RbI < Ge. The a ctual melting
points are C (CH), 166°C; Zn, 419°C; RbI, 642°C; and Ge, 938 °C. This agrees with our prediction.
Classify C, BaBr, GaAs, and AgZn as ionic, covalent, molec ular, or metallic solids and then arrange them in or der of
increasing melting points.
Answer
C (molecular) < AgZn (metallic) ~ BaBr (ionic) < GaAs (covalent). The actual melting points are C60, about 300°C;
AgZn, about 700°C; BaBr, 856°C; and GaAs, 1238°C.
Summary
The major types of solids are ionic, molecular, cov alent, and metallic. Ionic solids consist of positiv ely and negatively charged ions
held together by electrostatic forces; the strength of the bonding is reflected in the lattice energy. Ionic solids tend to have high
melting points and are rather hard. Molecular solids are held together by relatively weak forces, such as di pole–dipole interactions,
hydrogen bonds, and London dispersion forces. As a res ult, they tend to be rather soft and have low melting points, which depend
on their molecular structure. Covalent solids consist o f two- or three-dimensional networks of atoms held tog ether by covalent
bonds; they tend to be very hard and have high melt ing points. Metallic solids have unusual properties: in addition to having high
thermal and electrical conductivity and being malle able and ductile, they exhibit luster, a shiny surface that reflects light. An alloy
is a mixture of metals that has bulk metallic proper ties different from those of its constituent element s. Alloys can be formed by
substituting one metal atom for another of similar si ze in the lattice (substitutional alloys), by insertin g smaller atoms into holes in
the metal lattice (interstitial alloys), or by a comb ination of both. Although the elemental composition of most alloys can vary over
wide ranges, certain metals combine in only fixed propor tions to form intermetallic compounds with unique prop erties.
Contributors and Attributions
Mike Blaber (Florida State University)
Prof. David Blauch (Davidson College)
Paul Flowers (University of North Carolina - Pembroke), Kla us Theopold (University of Delaware) and Richard Langl ey
(Stephen F. Austin State University) with contributing au thors. Textbook content produced by OpenStax College i s licensed
under a Creative Commons Attribution License 4.0 license. Download for free at http://cnx.org/contents/85abf1932bd...a7ac8df6@9.110).
8.1.4: Properties of Solids is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.+ −
6 3 6
6 3 6
6 3 6
Exercise
60 2
60 2

8.1.5.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1700798.1.5: Phase Changes
To calculate the energy changes that accompany phase cha nges.
We take advantage of changes between the gas, liquid, and solid states to cool a drink with ice cubes (sol id to liquid), cool our
bodies by perspiration (liquid to gas), and cool food inside a refrigerator (gas to liquid and vice versa). We use dry ice, which is
solid CO, as a refrigerant (solid to gas), and we mak e artificial snow for skiing and snowboarding by trans forming a liquid to a
solid. In this section, we examine what happens when any o f the three forms of matter is converted to either of the other two. These
changes of state are often called phase changes. The six mo st common phase changes are shown in Figure.
Figure: Enthalpy changes that accompany phase transiti ons are indicated by purple and green arrows.
Energy Changes That Accompany Phase Changes
Phase changes are always accompanied by a change in the energy of a system. Fo r example, converting a liquid, in which the
molecules are close together, to a gas, in which the mo lecules are, on average, far apart, requires an input of energy (heat) to give
the molecules enough kinetic energy to allow them to overcome the intermolecular attractive forces. The stronger the attractive
forces, the more energy is needed to overcome them. Sol ids, which are highly ordered, have the strongest int ermolecular
interactions, whereas gases, which are very disordered, have the weakest. Thus any transition from a more or dered to a less ordered
state (solid to liquid, liquid to gas, or solid to gas) requires an input of energy; it is endothermic. Conversely, any transition from a
less ordered to a more ordered state (liquid to solid, gas to liquid, or gas to solid) releases energy; it is exothermic. The energy
change associated with each common phase change is shown i n Figure.
ΔH is positive for any transition from a more ordered to a less ordere d state and negative
for a transition from a less ordered to a more ordered state.
Previously, we defined the enthalpy changes associated wi th various chemical and physical processes. The melti ng points and
molar enthalpies of fusion (), the energy required to convert from a solid to a liquid, a process known as fusion (or melting),
as well as the normal boiling points and enthalpies of v aporization () of selected compounds are listed in Tab le.
Table: Melting and Boiling Points and Enthalpies of Fusion and Vaporization for Selected Substances. Values given under 1 atm. of
external pressure.Learning Objectives

8.1.5.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170079Substance Melting Point (°C) ΔH (kJ/mol) Boiling Point (°C) ΔH (kJ /mol)
N −210.0 0.71 −195.8 5.6
HCl −114.2 2.00 −85.1 16.2
Br −7.2 10.6 58.8 30.0
CCl −22.6 2.56 76.8 29.8
CH CH OH (ethanol) −114.1 4.93 78.3 38.6
CH (CH) CH (nhexane)−95.4 13.1 68.7 28.9
H O 0 6.01 100 40.7
Na 97.8 2.6 883 97.4
NaF 996 33.4 1704 176.1
The substances with the highest melting points usuall y have the highest enthalpies of fusion; they tend to be ionic compounds that
are held together by very strong electrostatic inter actions. Substances with high boiling points are those with strong intermolecular
interactions that must be overcome to convert a liqu id to a gas, resulting in high enthalpies of vaporizati on. The enthalpy of
vaporization of a given substance is much greater t han its enthalpy of fusion because it takes more ene rgy to completely separate
molecules (conversion from a liquid to a gas) than t o enable them only to move past one another freely (conversion from a solid to
a liquid).
Less energy is needed to allow molecules to move past each other than to s eparate them
totally.
Figure: The Sublimation of solid iodine. When solid iod ine is heated at ordinary atmospheric pressure, it subli mes. When the
I vapor comes in contact with a cold surface, it depo sits I crystals. Figure used with permission from Wikipedi a.
The direct conversion of a solid to a gas, without an intervening liquid phase, is called sublimation. The a mount of energy required
to sublime 1 mol of a pure solid is the enthalpy of sublimation (Δ H). Common substances that sublime at standard temperat ure
and pressure (STP; 0°C, 1 atm) include CO (dry ice); i odine (Figure); naphthalene, a substance used to pro tect woolen
clothing against moths; and 1,4-dichlorobenzene. As sh own in Figure, the enthalpy of sublimation of a subst ance is the sum
of its enthalpies of fusion and vaporization provided all values are at the same T; this is an application of Hess’s law.
Fusion, vaporization, and sublimation are endothermic processes; they occur only with the absorption of he at. Anyone who has
ever stepped out of a swimming pool on a cool, breez y day has felt the heat loss that accompanies the eva poration of water from
the skin. Our bodies use this same phenomenon to maint ain a constant temperature: we perspire continuously, even when at rest,
losing about 600 mL of water daily by evaporation fr om the skin. We also lose about 400 mL of water as water vapor in the air wefus vap
3 2
3 2 4 3
2 2
sub

8.1.5.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170079exhale, which also contributes to cooling. Refrigerator s and air-conditioners operate on a similar princip le: heat is absorbed from
the object or area to be cooled and used to vaporiz e a low-boiling-point liquid, such as ammonia or the chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs)
and the hydrofluorocarbons (HCFCs). The vapor is then t ransported to a different location and compressed, th us releasing and
dissipating the heat. Likewise, ice cubes efficientl y cool a drink not because of their low temperature but because heat is required to
convert ice at 0°C to liquid water at 0°C.
Temperature Curves
The processes on the right side of Figure —freezing, c ondensation, and deposition, which are the reverse of f usion,
sublimation, and vaporization—are exothermic. Thus h eat pumps that use refrigerants are essentially air-c onditioners running in
reverse. Heat from the environment is used to vaporiz e the refrigerant, which is then condensed to a liqui d in coils within a house
to provide heat. The energy changes that occur during ph ase changes can be quantified by using a heating or cooli ng curve.
Heating Curves
Figure shows a heating curve, a plot of temperature ve rsus heating time, for a 75 g sample of water. The samp le is initially
ice at 1 atm and −23°C; as heat is added, the temper ature of the ice increases linearly with time. The slo pe of the line depends on
both the mass of the ice and the specific heat (C) of ice, which is the number of joules required to r aise the temperature of 1 g of
ice by 1°C. As the temperature of the ice increases, the water molecules in the ice crystal absorb more and mo re energy and vibrate
more vigorously. At the melting point, they have enou gh kinetic energy to overcome attractive forces and move with respect to one
another. As more heat is added, the temperature of th e system does not increase further but remains constant at 0°C until a ll the ice
has melted. Once all the ice has been converted to liq uid water, the temperature of the water again begins to increase. Now,
however, the temperature increases more slowly than be fore because the specific heat capacity of water is greater than that of ice.
When the temperature of the water reaches 100°C, the wa ter begins to boil. Here, too, the temperature remains c onstant at 100°C
until all the water has been converted to steam. At th is point, the temperature again begins to rise, but at a faster rate than seen in
the other phases because the heat capacity of steam is less than that of ice or water.
Figure: A Heating Curve for Water. This plot of temp erature shows what happens to a 75 g sample of ice init ially at 1 atm
and −23°C as heat is added at a constant rate: A–B: he ating solid ice; B–C: melting ice; C–D: heating liqu id water; D–E:
vaporizing water; E–F: heating steam.
Thus the temperature of a system does not change during a pha se change. In this example, as long as even a tiny amount of ice is
present, the temperature of the system remains at 0°C during the melting process, and as long as even a sm all amount of liquid
water is present, the temperature of the system remains at 100°C during the boiling process. The rate at whic h heat is added does
not affect the temperature of the ice/water or water/ste am mixture because the added heat is being used exc lusively to overcome the
attractive forces that hold the more condensed phas e together. Many cooks think that food will cook fast er if the heat is turned ups

8.1.5.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170079higher so that the water boils more rapidly. Instead, the pot of water will boil to dryness sooner, but the temperature of the water
does not depend on how vigorously it boils.
The temperature of a sample does not change during a phase change.
If heat is added at a constant rate, as in Figure, the n the length of the horizontal lines, which represent s the time during
which the temperature does not change, is directly pro portional to the magnitude of the enthalpies associa ted with the phase
changes. In Figure, the horizontal line at 100°C is much longer than the line at 0°C because the entha lpy of vaporization of
water is several times greater than the enthalpy of fusion.
A superheated liquid is a sample of a liquid at the t emperature and pressure at which it should be a gas. Superheated liquids are not
stable; the liquid will eventually boil, sometimes vio lently. The phenomenon of superheating causes “bumpin g” when a liquid is
heated in the laboratory. When a test tube containin g water is heated over a Bunsen burner, for example, o ne portion of the liquid
can easily become too hot. When the superheated liqu id converts to a gas, it can push or “bump” the rest of the liquid out of the test
tube. Placing a stirring rod or a small piece of cer amic (a “boiling chip”) in the test tube allows bubb les of vapor to form on the
surface of the object so the liquid boils instead of b ecoming superheated. Superheating is the reason a liqu id heated in a smooth cup
in a microwave oven may not boil until the cup is moved, when the motion of the cup allows bubbles to form.
Cooling Curves
The cooling curve, a plot of temperature versus cool ing time, in Figure plots temperature versus time as a 75 g sample of
steam, initially at 1 atm and 200°C, is cooled. Altho ugh we might expect the cooling curve to be the mirr or image of the heating
curve in Figure, the cooling curve is not an identical mirror image. As heat is removed from t he steam, the temperature falls
until it reaches 100°C. At this temperature, the steam begins to condense to liquid water. No further temperat ure change occurs
until all the steam is converted to the liquid; then the temperature again decreases as the water is coo led. We might expect to reach
another plateau at 0°C, where the water is converted to ice; in reality, however, this does not always occur. Instead, the temperature
often drops below the freezing point for some time, a s shown by the little dip in the cooling curve below 0 °C. This region
corresponds to an unstable form of the liquid, a supe rcooled liquid. If the liquid is allowed to stand, if cooling is continued, or if a
small crystal of the solid phase is added (a seed c rystal), the supercooled liquid will convert to a so lid, sometimes quite suddenly.
As the water freezes, the temperature increases slightl y due to the heat evolved during the freezing proce ss and then holds constant
at the melting point as the rest of the water freezes. Subsequently, the temperature of the ice decreases agai n as more heat is
removed from the system.
Figure: A Cooling Curve for Water. This plot of temp erature shows what happens to a 75 g sample of steam ini tially at 1 atm
and 200°C as heat is removed at a constant rate: A–B: cooling steam; B–C: condensing steam; C–D: cooling liq uid water to give a
supercooled liquid; D–E: warming the liquid as it beg ins to freeze; E–F: freezing liquid water; F–G: cooli ng ice.

8.1.5.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170079Supercooling effects have a huge impact on Earth’s cli mate. For example, supercooling of water droplets in clouds can prevent the
clouds from releasing precipitation over regions that are persistently arid as a result. Clouds consist of tiny droplets of water, which
in principle should be dense enough to fall as rain. In fact, however, the droplets must aggregate to reac h a certain size before they
can fall to the ground. Usually a small particle (a nucleus) is required for the droplets to aggregate; the nuc leus can be a dust
particle, an ice crystal, or a particle of silver iod ide dispersed in a cloud during seeding (a method of inducing rain). Unfortunately,
the small droplets of water generally remain as a sup ercooled liquid down to about −10°C, rather than fre ezing into ice crystals that
are more suitable nuclei for raindrop formation. One approach to producing rainfall from an existing clo ud is to cool the water
droplets so that they crystallize to provide nuclei around which raindrops can grow. This is best done by dispersing small granules
of solid CO (dry ice) into the cloud from an airplan e. Solid CO sublimes directly to the gas at pressures of 1 atm or lower, and the
enthalpy of sublimation is substantial (25.3 kJ/mol). As the CO sublimes, it absorbs heat from the cloud, of ten with the desired
results.
If a 50.0 g ice cube at 0.0°C is added to 500 mL of tea at 20.0°C, what is the temperature of the tea whe n the ice cube has just
melted? Assume that no heat is transferred to or from the surroundings. The density of water (and iced tea) is 1.00 g/mL over
the range 0°C–20°C, the specific heats of liquid wate r and ice are 4.184 J/(g•°C) and 2.062 J/(g•°C), respe ctively, and the
enthalpy of fusion of ice is 6.01 kJ/mol.
Given: mass, volume, initial temperature, density, specific heats, and
Asked for: final temperature
Strategy
Substitute the given values into the general equation relating heat gained (by the ice) to heat lost (by the tea) to obtain the final
temperature of the mixture.
Solution
When two substances or objects at different temperatur es are brought into contact, heat will flow from the wa rmer one to the
cooler. The amount of heat that flows is given by
where is heat, is mass, is the specific heat, and is the temperature change. Eventually, the temperatures of the two
substances will become equal at a value somewhere between their initial temperatures. Calculating the temper ature of iced tea
after adding an ice cube is slightly more complicate d. The general equation relating heat gained and hea t lost is still valid, but
in this case we also have to take into account the a mount of heat required to melt the ice cube from ic e at 0.0°C to liquid water
at 0.0°C.
The amount of heat gained by the ice cube as it melts is d etermined by its enthalpy of fusion in kJ/mol:
For our 50.0 g ice cube:
Thus, when the ice cube has just melted, it has absorbe d 16.7 kJ of heat from the tea. We can then substitut e this value into the
first equation to determine the change in temperature of the tea:2 2
Example: Cooling Tea

8.1.5.6 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170079This would be the temperature of the tea when the ice cube has just finished melting; however, this leaves t he melted ice still at
0.0°C. We might more practically want to know what the final temperature of the mixture of tea will be once the melted ice has
come to thermal equilibrium with the tea. To determin e this, we can add one more step to the calculation by plugging in to the
general equation relating heat gained and heat lost agai n:
The final temperature is in between the initial temp eratures of the tea (12.02 °C) and the melted ice (0.0 °C), so this answer
makes sense. In this example, the tea loses much more heat in melting the ice than in mixing with the cold water, showing the
importance of accounting for the heat of phase changes!
Suppose you are overtaken by a blizzard while ski touri ng and you take refuge in a tent. You are thirsty, bu t you forgot to bring
liquid water. You have a choice of eating a few handfu ls of snow (say 400 g) at −5.0°C immediately to quench your thirst or
setting up your propane stove, melting the snow, and h eating the water to body temperature before drinking it. You recall that
the survival guide you leafed through at the hotel sa id something about not eating snow, but you cannot r emember why—after
all, it’s just frozen water. To understand the guide’ s recommendation, calculate the amount of heat that y our body will have to
supply to bring 400 g of snow at −5.0°C to your body’s intern al temperature of 37°C. Use the data in Example
Answer
200 kJ (4.1 kJ to bring the ice from −5.0°C to 0.0°C, 1 33.6 kJ to melt the ice at 0.0°C, and 61.9 kJ to bring the water from
0.0°C to 37°C), which is energy that would not have been exp ended had you first melted the snow.
Summary
Fusion, vaporization, and sublimation are endothermic processes, whereas freezing, condensation, and deposit ion are exothermic
processes. Changes of state are examples of phase changes, or phase transitions. All phase changes are accompanied by changes
in the energy of a system. Changes from a more-ordere d state to a less-ordered state (such as a liquid to a gas) are endothermic.
Changes from a less-ordered state to a more-ordered state (such as a liquid to a solid) are always exothermic. The conversion of a
solid to a liquid is called fusion (or melting). The energy required to melt 1 mol of a substance is its enthalpy of fusion (Δ H).
The energy change required to vaporize 1 mol of a su bstance is the enthalpy of vaporization (Δ H). The direct conversion of a
solid to a gas is sublimation. The amount of energy needed to sublime 1 mol of a substance is its enthalpy of sublimation (Δ H)
and is the sum of the enthalpies of fusion and vapo rization. Plots of the temperature of a substance ve rsus heat added or versus
heating time at a constant rate of heating are call ed heating curves. Heating curves relate temperature changes to phase t ransitions.
A superheated liquid, a liquid at a temperature and pressure at which it should be a gas, is not stable. A cooling curve is not
exactly the reverse of the heating curve because man y liquids do not freeze at the expected temperature. Instead, they form a
supercooled liquid, a metastable liquid phase that exists below the norma l melting point. Supercooled liquids usually crystalliz e
on standing, or adding a seed crystal of the same or another substance can induce crystalliza tion.
8.1.5: Phase Changes is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.Exercise: Death by Freezing
fus
vap
sub

8.1.6.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1700818.1.6: Phase Diagrams
To understand the basics of a one-component phase diagram as a function of temperature and pressure in a closed s ystem.
To be able to identify the triple point, the critical poi nt, and four regions: solid, liquid, gas, and a supercritic al fluid.
The state exhibited by a given sample of matter dep ends on the identity, temperature, and pressure of t he sample. A phase diagram
is a graphic summary of the physical state of a substanc e as a function of temperature and pressure in a closed s ystem.
Introduction
A typical phase diagram consists of discrete regions tha t represent the different phases exhibited by a subs tance (Figure).
Each region corresponds to the range of combinations of temperature and pressure over which that phase is stable. The combination
of high pressure and low temperature (upper left of Figure) corresponds to the solid phase, whereas the g as phase is favored
at high temperature and low pressure (lower right). Th e combination of high temperature and high pressure (upper right)
corresponds to a supercritical fluid.
Figure: A Typical Phase Diagram for a Substance That Exhibits Three Ph ases—Solid, Liquid, and Gas—and a Supercritical
Region
The solid phase is favored at low temperature and high pressure; the gas phase is favored at high temperature a nd low pressure.
The lines in a phase diagram correspond to the combi nations of temperature and pressure at which two phases can coexist in
equilibrium. In Figure, the line that connects point s A and D separates the solid and liquid phases and sh ows how the
melting point of a solid varies with pressure. The soli d and liquid phases are in equilibrium all along th is line; crossing the line
horizontally corresponds to melting or freezing. Th e line that connects points A and B is the vapor pre ssure curve of the liquid,
which we discussed in Section 11.5. It ends at the critic al point, beyond which the substance exists as a superc ritical fluid. The line
that connects points A and C is the vapor pressure c urve of the solid phase. Along this line, the solid is in equilibrium wit h the
vapor phase through sublimation and deposition. Finally, point A, where the solid/liquid, liquid/gas, and solid/ gas lines intersect, is
the triple point; it is the only combination of temperature and pressure at which al l three phases (solid, liquid, and gas) are in
equilibrium and can therefore exist simultaneously. B ecause no more than three phases can ever coexist, a phase diagram can never
have more than three lines intersecting at a single p oint.Learning Objectives

8.1.6.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170081Remember that a phase diagram, such as the one in Fi gure, is for a single pure substance in a closed sy stem, not for a liquid
in an open beaker in contact with air at 1 atm pressur e. In practice, however, the conclusions reached abou t the behavior of a
substance in a closed system can usually be extrapolate d to an open system without a great deal of error.
The Phase Diagram of Water
Figure shows the phase diagram of water and illustrates that the triple point of water occurs at 0.01°C and 0.00604 atm (4.59
mmHg). Far more reproducible than the melting point of ice, which depends on the amount of dissolved air an d the atmospheric
pressure, the triple point (273.16 K) is used to define the absolute (Kelvin) temperature scale. The triple point also represents the
lowest pressure at which a liquid phase can exist in eq uilibrium with the solid or vapor. At pressures less th an 0.00604 atm,
therefore, ice does not melt to a liquid as the tempe rature increases; the solid sublimes directly to wat er vapor. Sublimation of water
at low temperature and pressure can be used to “freez e-dry” foods and beverages. The food or beverage is f irst cooled to subzero
temperatures and placed in a container in which the pressure is maintained below 0.00604 atm. Then, as the t emperature is
increased, the water sublimes, leaving the dehydrated food (such as that used by backpackers or astronauts) or the powdered
beverage (as with freeze-dried coffee).
Figure: Two Versions of the Phase Diagram of Water. (a) In this graph with linear temperature and pressure ax es, the
boundary between ice and liquid water is almost verti cal. (b) This graph with an expanded scale illustrates the decrease in melting
point with increasing pressure. (The letters refer to p oints discussed in Example).
The phase diagram for water illustrated in Figure sho ws the boundary between ice and water on an expanded sc ale. The
melting curve of ice slopes up and slightly to the left rather than up and to the right as in Figure; that is, the melting point of
ice decreases with increasing pressure; at 100 MPa (987 atm), ice m elts at −9°C. Water behaves this way because it is one of the
few known substances for which the crystalline solid is less dense than the liquid (others include antimony and bismuth).
Increasing the pressure of ice that is in equilibrium with water at 0°C and 1 atm tends to push some of th e molecules closer
together, thus decreasing the volume of the sample. T he decrease in volume (and corresponding increase in density) is smaller for a
solid or a liquid than for a gas, but it is sufficient to me lt some of the ice.
In Figure point A is located at P = 1 atm and T = −1.0°C, within the solid (ice) region of the phase d iagram. As the pressure
increases to 150 atm while the temperature remains t he same, the line from point A crosses the ice/water b oundary to point B,
which lies in the liquid water region. Consequently, a pplying a pressure of 150 atm will melt ice at −1.0° C. We have already
indicated that the pressure dependence of the meltin g point of water is of vital importance. If the soli d/liquid boundary in the phase
diagram of water were to slant up and to the right ra ther than to the left, ice would be denser than water, ice cubes would sink,
water pipes would not burst when they freeze, and antifreez e would be unnecessary in automobile engines.
Until recently, many textbooks described ice skating as being possible because the pressure generated by th e skater’s blade is
high enough to melt the ice under the blade, thereby creating a lubricating layer of liquid water that e nables the blade to slide
across the ice. Although this explanation is intuitively sati sfying, it is incorrect, as we can show by a simple calcul ation.Ice Skating: An Incorrect Hypothesis of Phase Transitions

8.1.6.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170081
Pressure from ice skates on ice. from wikihow.com.
Recall that pressure (P) is the force (F) applied per unit area (A):
To calculate the pressure an ice skater exerts on t he ice, we need to calculate only the force exerted a nd the area of the skate
blade. If we assume a 75.0 kg (165 lb) skater, then the force ex erted by the skater on the ice due to gravity is
where m is the mass and g is the acceleration due to Earth’s gravity (9.81 m/s). Th us the force is
If we assume that the skate blades are 2.0 mm wide and 25 cm l ong, then the area of the bottom of each blade is
If the skater is gliding on one foot, the pressure exerted on the ice is
The pressure is much lower than the pressure needed to decrease the melting point of ice by even 1°C, and experience indicates that
it is possible to skate even when the temperature is we ll below freezing. Thus pressure-induced melting of t he ice cannot explain
the low friction that enables skaters (and hockey puc ks) to glide. Recent research indicates that the sur face of ice, where the
ordered array of water molecules meets the air, consis ts of one or more layers of almost liquid water. These layers, together with
melting induced by friction as a skater pushes forwar d, appear to account for both the ease with which a sk ater glides and the fact
that skating becomes more difficult below about −7°C, when the number of lubricating surface water layers decreases.
Referring to the phase diagram of water in Figure:
a. predict the physical form of a sample of water at 400°C and 150 atm.
b. describe the changes that occur as the sample in part (a) is slowly allowed to cool to −50°C at a constant press ure of 150
atm.
Given: phase diagram, temperature, and pressure
Asked for: physical form and physical changes
Strategy:
A. Identify the region of the phase diagram corresponding t o the initial conditions and identify the phase that exists in this
region.
B. Draw a line corresponding to the given pressure. Move alo ng that line in the appropriate direction (in this case coo ling) and
describe the phase changes.
Solution:2
Example: Water

8.1.6.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170081a. A Locate the starting point on the phase diagram in part (a) in Figure. The initial conditions correspond to p oint A,
which lies in the region of the phase diagram representing water vapor. Thus water at T = 400°C and P = 150 atm is a gas.
b. B Cooling the sample at constant pressure corresponds to m oving left along the horizontal line in part (a) in Fig ure.
At about 340°C (point B), we cross the vapor pressure curve, at which point water vapor will begin to condense and the
sample will consist of a mixture of vapor and liquid. Whe n all of the vapor has condensed, the temperature drops furth er,
and we enter the region corresponding to liquid water (in dicated by point C). Further cooling brings us to the melt ing curve,
the line that separates the liquid and solid phases at a l ittle below 0°C (point D), at which point the sample will consist of a
mixture of liquid and solid water (ice). When all of the wat er has frozen, cooling the sample to −50°C takes us alon g the
horizontal line to point E, which lies within the region cor responding to solid water. At P = 150 atm and T = −50°C,
therefore, the sample is solid ice.
Referring to the phase diagram of water in Figure, p redict the physical form of a sample of water at −0.0 050°C as the
pressure is gradually increased from 1.0 mmHg to 218 atm.
Answer
The sample is initially a gas, condenses to a solid as the pressure increases, and then melts when the press ure is increased
further to give a liquid.
The Phase Diagram of Carbon Dioxide
In contrast to the phase diagram of water, the phase d iagram of CO (Figure) has a more typical melting cu rve, sloping up
and to the right. The triple point is −56.6°C and 5.11 atm, which means that liquid CO cannot exist at pr essures lower than 5.11
atm. At 1 atm, therefore, solid CO sublimes directly t o the vapor while maintaining a temperature of −78.5° C, the normal
sublimation temperature. Solid CO is generally known as dry ice because it is a cold solid with no liquid phase observed when it is
warmed.
Dry ice () sublimed in air under room temperature an d pressure. from Wikipedia.
Also notice the critical point at 30.98°C and 72.79 a tm. Supercritical carbon dioxide is emerging as a natu ral refrigerant, making it
a low carbon (and thus a more environmentally friendly) so lution for domestic heat pumps.Exercise

8.1.6.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170081
Figure: The Phase Diagram of Carbon Dioxide. Note the critical point, the triple point, and the normal su blimation
temperature in this diagram.
The Critical Point
As the phase diagrams above demonstrate, a combinatio n of high pressure and low temperature allows gases to be liquefied. As we
increase the temperature of a gas, liquefaction becom es more and more difficult because higher and highe r pressures are required to
overcome the increased kinetic energy of the molecu les. In fact, for every substance, there is some tempe rature above which the
gas can no longer be liquefied, regardless of pressur e. This temperature is the critical temperature (T), the highest temperature at
which a substance can exist as a liquid. Above the crit ical temperature, the molecules have too much kinet ic energy for the
intermolecular attractive forces to hold them toget her in a separate liquid phase. Instead, the substance forms a single phase that
completely occupies the volume of the container. Subst ances with strong intermolecular forces tend to form a liquid phase over a
very large temperature range and therefore have hig h critical temperatures. Conversely, substances with weak intermolecular
interactions have relatively low critical temperatur es. Each substance also has a critical pressure (P), the minimum pressure
needed to liquefy it at the critical temperature. Th e combination of critical temperature and critical pressure is called the critical
point. The critical temperatures and pressures of sever al common substances are listed in Figure.
Figure: Critical Temperatures and Pressures of Some Simpl e Substances
Substance T (°C) P (atm)
NH 132.4 113.5
CO 31.0 73.8
CH CH OH (ethanol) 240.9 61.4
He −267.96 2.27
Hg 1477 1587
CH −82.6 46.0
N −146.9 33.9
H O 374.0 217.7
High-boiling-point, nonvolatile liquids have high critic al temperatures and vice versa.c
c
c c
3 2

8.1.6.6 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170081Supercritical Fluids
To understand what happens at the critical point, con sider the effects of temperature and pressure on the densities of liquids and
gases, respectively. As the temperature of a liquid i ncreases, its density decreases. As the pressure of a ga s increases, its density
increases. At the critical point, the liquid and gas phases have exactly the same density, and only a singl e phase exists. This single
phase is called a supercritical fluid, which exhibits many of the properties of a gas but has a density m ore typical of a liquid. For
example, the density of water at its critical point (T = 374°C, P = 217.7 atm) is 0.32 g/mL, about one-third that of liquid water at
room temperature but much greater than that of water vapor under most conditions. The transition between a liquid/gas mixture and
a supercritical phase is demonstrated for in Figure. At the critical temperature, the meniscus separating the liquid and
gas phases disappears.
Figure: Liquid is heated in a pressure cell until it reac hes the critical point were it changes into a supercriti cal
fluid.Below the critical temperature the meniscus bet ween the liquid and gas phases is apparent. At the critica l temperature, the
meniscus disappears because the density of the vapor is e qual to the density of the liquid. Above T, a dense homogeneous fluid
fills the tube.
In the last few years, supercritical fluids have evol ved from laboratory curiosities to substances with im portant commercial
applications. For example, carbon dioxide has a low cr itical temperature (31°C), a comparatively low critic al pressure (73 atm),
and low toxicity, making it easy to contain and relat ively safe to manipulate. Because many substances are quite soluble in
supercritical CO, commercial processes that use it as a solvent are now well established in the oil indust ry, the food industry, and
others. Supercritical CO is pumped into oil wells that are no longer producing much oil to dissolve the res idual oil in the
underground reservoirs. The less-viscous solution is t hen pumped to the surface, where the oil can be reco vered by evaporation
(and recycling) of the CO. In the food, flavor, and fragrance industry, supercritical CO is used to extra ct components from natural
substances for use in perfumes, remove objectionable organic acids from hops prior to making beer, and se lectively extract caffeine
from whole coffee beans without removing important fl avor components. The latter process was patented in 19 74, and now
virtually all decaffeinated coffee is produced this way. The earlier method used volatile organic solven ts such as methylene chloride
(dichloromethane [CH Cl], boiling point = 40°C), which is difficult to remove completely from the beans an d is known to cause
cancer in laboratory animals at high doses.
Summary
The states of matter exhibited by a substance under different temperatures and pressures can be summari zed graphically in a phase
diagram, which is a plot of pressure versus temperature. Phase diagrams contain discrete regions corresponding to th e solid, liquid,
and gas phases. The solid and liquid regions are se parated by the melting curve of the substance, and the liquid and gas regions are
separated by its vapor pressure curve, which ends at t he critical point. Within a given region, only a si ngle phase is stable, but along
the lines that separate the regions, two phases are i n equilibrium at a given temperature and pressure. The lines separating the three
phases intersect at a single point, the triple point, which is the only combination of temperature and p ressure at which all three
phases can coexist in equilibrium. Water has an unu sual phase diagram: its melting point decreases with increasing pressure
supercritical  uidssupercritical  uids
c
2 2
2 2

8.1.6.7 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/170081because ice is less dense than liquid water. The phase diagram of carbon dioxide shows that liquid carbon dioxide cannot exist at
atmospheric pressure. Consequently, solid carbon dioxi de sublimes directly to a gas.
8.1.6: Phase Diagrams is shared under a CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.

8.1.7.1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1959008.1.7: The Born-Haber Cycle
We can measure the strength of a covalent bond, beca use we can usually break a covalently-bonded molecul e into fragments and
measure the energy required to do so. For example, if we want to measure the bond energy in HCl, we can carry out the reaction:
However, we cannot measure the strength of an ionic bond this way, because ionic compounds do not break apart into gase ous ions:
NaCl(s) Na (g) + Cl (g)
Born-Haber cycles are used to estimate the strength of “io nic bonds” in compounds such as NaCl.
An Application of Hess's Law
In a Born-Haber cycle, we carry out the following sequenc e of reactions:
Elements
(in their standard
states)Gaseous atoms Gaseous ions Compound
The energy of each step except the last one can be measured experimentally. In addition, we can measure t he energy of the singlestep reaction below (this is the “heat of formation” of th e compound):
Elements (in their standard states) Compound
By Hess’s Law, the energies of the reactions in the f irst sequence must add up to the heat of formation (th e energy of the single-step
reaction).
The basic concept is not hard. The difficult is in keeping the details straight. Ionic compounds contai n two (or more) elements, each
of which must be converted to gaseous atoms and then to gaseous ions. For example, here are the steps require d to convert
elemental calcium (a solid at room temperature) to gaseous ca lcium ions:
Sublime the solid calcium (convert it to a gas): Ca(s) Ca(g)
Remove one electron from each atom: Ca(g) Ca (g) + e
Remove a second electron from each atom: Ca (g) Ca (g) + e
Nonmetals often form covalent molecules. If so, you must break the covalent bond as part of this process. Here are the steps
required to convert elemental bromine (a diatomic liqui d at room temperature) to gaseous bromide ions:
Vaporize the liquid bromine (convert it to a gas): Br (l) Br (g)
Break the covalent bond in Br: Br (g) 2 Br(g)
Add an electron to each atom: Br(g) + e Br (g)
Your job in sorting out a Born-Haber cycle has two par ts. The first is to be able to figure out exactly wh at reactions must occur
when you convert the original element to a monatomic gas. The second is to know how to identify the energy of each r eaction type.
The reaction types that you might see in a Born-Haber cycle
1) Heat of sublimation ():this is the energy required to convert a solid to a gas. For metals and most solid nonmetals,
sublimation produces a monatomic gas. Heats of sublima tion are always positive numbers. For iodine (which is diatomic),
sublimation produces I (g).
Na(s) Na(g) S(s) S(g) I (s) I (g)
2) Heat of vaporization (): this is the energy required to convert a liquid to a gas. Heats of vaporization are always positive
numbers. The only elements for which this will come into play are bromine and mercury, which are liquids at room temperat ure.
Hg(l) Hg(g) Br (l) Br (g)+ –
+ 2+ –
2 2
2 2
2 2
2 2

8.1.7.2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/1959003) Bond dissociation energy (BDE, or): this is the energy required to break a covalent bo nd. Bond dissociation energies
are always positive numbers. Bond dissociation energie s only come into play for the diatomic nonmetals (H, N, O, F, Cl, Br,
I and At). In these cases, sublimation or vaporizatio n gives us diatomic molecules, not individual atoms, so we must also break
the covalent bonds in the gaseous form.
H (g) 2 H(g) N (g) 2 N(g)
4) Ionization energy (IE, or): this is the energy required to remove one electro n from a gaseous atom. Since many ionic
compounds contain metals that have lost two or more el ectrons, we often need to consider two or more successi ve ionization
energies. For example, if we need to make aluminum ion s, we must remove three electrons from Al(g), so we must consider the
first three ionization energies of aluminum:
Al(g) Al (g) + e = “first ionization energy” (IE1)
Al (g) Al (g) + e = “second ionization energy” (IE2)
Al (g) Al (g) + e = “third ionization energy” (IE3)
Ionization energies are always positive numbers, and they increase as you remove more electrons (so IE1 < IE2 < IE3 for any given
element).
5) Electron affinity (EA, or): this is the energy absorbed or released when you ad d one electron to a gaseous atom. In
general, only the first electron affinity can be meas ured directly, because negative ions repel electron s. However, the second (and
third, if necessary) electron affinity can be estima ted using a variation on the Born-Haber cycle. Here are the reactions that must be
considered if you need to make oxide ions.
O(g) + e O (g) = “first electron affinity” (EA1, or simply EA)
O (g) + e O (g) = “second electron affinity” (EA2)
The first electron affinity is usually a negative numb er (a few elements have positive EA’s). The second EA (a nd beyond) is always
positive.
6) Solution energy (): this is the energy released or absorbed for the so lution process of an ionic compound. Here is the
reaction that must be considered for the solution of AlF (s).
AlF (s) Al (aq) + 3 F (aq)
7) Hydration energy (HE, or): this is the energy released for the solution of gas eous ions of a compound. The hydration
energy is a measure of all the ion-dipole attraction s between the ions on the water solvent. Here is the reac tion that must be
considered for the hydration of the ions of AlF (s).
Al (g) + 3 F (g) Al (aq) + 3 F (aq)
8) Crystal lattice energy (CLE, or): this is the energy released when gaseous ions are c onverted into the solid ionic
compound. For example, the lattice energy of aluminum fluor ide corresponds to the following reaction:
Al (g) + 3 F (g) AlF (s)
Lattice energies are always large negative numbers, rangi ng from around –600 to –13,000 kJ/mol.
9) Heat of formation ()): this is the energy absorbed or released when you mak e an ionic compound from its constituent
elements (as they normally appear at room temperature an d 1 atm pressure). For aluminum fluoride, the corresponding reaction is:
Al(s) + / F (g) AlF (s)
Heats of formation are virtually always negative numbers for ionic compounds.
Putting the reactions together:
Here is an example of how these reactions can be fitted together to make the complete Born-Haber cycle for LiF. We start with
solid Li and gaseous F, the standard states of these ele ments at room temperature and 1 atm pressure.2 2 2 2 2 2
2 2
2 2
+ 2+ –
2+ 3+ –
– – 2–
33+ –
3+ – 3+ –
3+ –3
2 2 3

8.1.7.3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/195900
Energy “bookkeeping”: + IE1 + / ·BDE + EA + CLE =
For CaI, the energy bookkeeping would look like this (see if you can figure out why). Note that there are two heats of sublimation
involved, because both calcium and iodine are solids at room temperature.
(Ca) + IE1 + IE2 + BDE + (I) + 2·EA + CLE =
For Al O, the energy bookkeeping would look like this. Aga in, see if you can figure out why. Note that in this ca se, we must
include two electron affinities for oxygen, because the ch arge on oxygen is –2 in this compound.
2· + 2·IE1 + 2·IE2 + 2·IE3 + / ·BDE + 3·EA1 + 3·EA2 + CLE =
These problems can also be approached in terms of an energy diagram (as shown in the following example problem).
Given the partial Born-Haber energy level diagram bel ow, along with the ∆H values provided, answer the quest ions that
follow.
a. Determine ∆H [Fe]
b. Determine ∆H [Fe O]
c. Determine ∆H [O(g)]
d. Determine ∆H [O(g)]
e. What is the value for the sum (∆H [Fe(g)] + ∆H [Fe(g)] + ∆H [Fe(g)])?
Solution
To solve this problem, we can begin by using the energ ies given below the diagram to draw a couple of additio nal energy
levels….12
2 3
Example
sublimation
CLE 2 3
EA1
EA2
IE1 IE2 IE3

8.1.7.4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/195900In any Born-Haber diagram, the energy of the elements in their standard states (Fe(s) + / O (g) in this case) is zer o.
The ∆H of Fe O (s) is -826 kJ/mol, so the energy of Fe O (s) i s -826 kJ.
The bond dissociation energy of O (g) is 495 kJ/mol, so con verting / of a mole of O (g) into 3 moles of O(g) requires
/ (495 kJ) = 742.5 kJ. On the diagram in the problem, the lowest l evel that contains 3 O(g) is the one at the bottom
(labeled 2 Fe(g) + 3 O(g)). Therefore, the level correspo nding to 2 Fe(g) + / O (g) must be 742.5 kJ below this. 15 37.5 kJ
– 742.5 kJ = 795 kJ.
Below, we’ve redrawn the Born-Haber diagram with these add itional energy values.
Now we can use this diagram to answer the questions. For ea ch question, the following diagram shows the relevant ∆ H value.
The substances that change are shown in red, and subst ances that are spectators during the reaction are shown in green.
a) Comparing the levels at E = 0 and E = 795 kJ, we se e that the only change is 2 Fe(s) -> 2 Fe(g). This is the reaction for the
sublimation of Fe(s). Therefore, ∆H = 795 kJ – 0 kJ = 7 95 kJ for this reaction. Since this energy correspond s to the sublimation
of 2 moles of Fe, the enthalpy of sublimation is 795 kJ/2 mo l = 397.5 kJ/mol.
b) The crystal lattice energy is the energy change o n going from the gaseous ions to the solid compound: 2 Fe (g) + 3 O (g) > Fe O (s). From the diagram, we can calculate this energy change: ∆H = (-826 kJ) – 14012.3 kJ = -14838.3 kJ. Since this
corresponds to the formation of one mole of Fe O, the crystal lattice energy is -14838.3 kJ/mol.32 2
f 2 3 2 3
232 2
32 2
3+ 2–
2 3
2 3

8.1.7.5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/195900
c) EA1 for oxygen is the energy change for the react ion O(g) -> O (g). Looking at the diagram, we see that g oing from the
12100.3 kJ level to the 11677.3 kJ level corresponds to the reaction 3 O(g) -> 3 O (g), which is the right reaction, just
multiplied by 3. (The iron remains in the same state, so it is a spectator here. Therefore, ∆H = 11677.3 kJ – 12100.3 kJ = -423
kJ for this reaction. Since this energy corresponds to the ionization of three moles of O, the EA1 is -423 kJ /3 mol = -141
kJ/mol.
d) EA2 for oxygen is the energy change for the react ion O (g) -> O (g). Looking at the diagram, we see that going from the
11677.3 kJ level to the 14012.3 kJ level corresponds t o the reaction 3 O (g) -> 3 O (g), which is the right rea ction, just
multiplied by 3. (Again, the iron remains in the same state.) Therefore, ∆H = 14012.3 kJ - 11677.3 kJ = 2335 kJ for this
reaction. Since this energy corresponds to the ionization o f three moles of O, the EA2 is 2335 kJ/3 mol = 778.3 kJ/mol.–
– 2–
– 2–

8.1.7.6 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/195900
e) The sum of the three IE’s for iron is the total en ergy required to convert a mole of Fe(g) into a mole of Fe (g),
corresponding to the reaction Fe(g) ® Fe (g) + 3 e. Looking at the diagram, we see that going from the 1537.5 kJ level to the
12100.3 kJ level corresponds to the reaction 2 Fe(g) ® 2 Fe (g) + 6 e, which is the right reaction, just multiplied by 2. Note
that we had to go to the 12100.3 kJ level in order to keep the oxygen in the same state, 3 O(g). Therefor e, ∆H = 12100.3 kJ –
1537.5 kJ = 10562.8 kJ for this reaction. Since this ene rgy corresponds to the ionization of two moles of Fe, t he correct answer
is 10562.8 kJ/2 mol = 5281.4 kJ/mol.
8.1.7: The Born-Haber Cycle is shared under a not declared license and was authored, remixed, and/or curated by LibreTexts.3+
3+ –
3+ –

1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/211848Index
A
absolute zero
3.1.3: The Gas Laws
Absorption spectrum
5.1.3: Atomic Emission Spectra and the Bohr Model
accuracy
0.2: Essential Ideas of Chemistry
9.2.5: Measurement Uncertainty, Accuracy, and
Precision
acid
2.1.2: Precipitation and Solubility Rules
2.1.3: Acid-Base Reactions
acid ionization
7.2.1: Brønsted–Lowry Acids and Bases
7.2.2: Autoionization of Water
acidic
7.2.3: pH and pOH
actinide
9.3.3: The Periodic Table
actual yield
1.1.7: Limiting Reactants
adhesive force
8.1.3: Properties of Liquids
alkadiynes
2.1.3: Acid-Base Reactions
alkali metal
9.3.3: The Periodic Table
5.2.7: Group Trends for the Active Metals
alkaline earth metal
9.3.3: The Periodic Table
5.2.7: Group Trends for the Active Metals
allotropes
5.2.8: Group Trends for Selected Nonmetals
alloy
5.2.6: Metals, Nonmetals, and Metalloids
amphiprotic
7.2.1: Brønsted–Lowry Acids and Bases
7.2.2: Autoionization of Water
amphoteric
7.2.1: Brønsted–Lowry Acids and Bases
7.2.2: Autoionization of Water
amplitude
5.1.1: The Wave Nature of Light
analytical data
Topic A- Equations, Formulas, and Stoichiometry
anion
9.3.1: Atomic Structure and Symbolism
6.1.2: Interpreting Lewis Structures
aqueous solution
2.1.5: Writing Net Ionic Equations
aqueous solutions
Topic B- Reactions in Aqueous Solution
2.1: Reactions in Aqueous Solution
Atmosphere
3.1.2: Pressure
atom
9.2.2: Phases and Classification of Matter
atomic mass
9.3.1: Atomic Structure and Symbolismatomic mass unit
9.3.1: Atomic Structure and Symbolism
atomic number
9.3.1: Atomic Structure and Symbolism
atomic orbital
5.1.5: Quantum Mechanics and Atomic Orbitals
6.2.3: Orbital Overlap in Multiple Bonds
atomic structure
0.3: Atoms, Molecules, and Ions
atoms
0.1: What should I know already?
0.2: Essential Ideas of Chemistry
Aufbau principle
5.1.8: Electron Configurations
autoionization
7.2.1: Brønsted–Lowry Acids and Bases
7.2.2: Autoionization of Water
avogadro's law
3.1.3: The Gas Laws
Avogadro's number
1.1.3: Avogadro's Number and the Mole
azimuthal quantum number
5.1.5: Quantum Mechanics and Atomic Orbitals
B
balanced equation
1.1.6: Reaction Stoichiometry
barometer
3.1.2: Pressure
barometric pressure
3.1.2: Pressure
base
2.1.2: Precipitation and Solubility Rules
2.1.3: Acid-Base Reactions
base ionization
7.2.1: Brønsted–Lowry Acids and Bases
7.2.2: Autoionization of Water
basic
7.2.3: pH and pOH
bent
6.1.6: The VSEPR Model
binary acid
9.3.5: Chemical Nomenclature
binary compound
9.3.5: Chemical Nomenclature
blackbody radiation
5.1.2: The Particle Nature of Light
Bohr's equation
5.1.6: 3D Representation of Orbitals
Boltzmann distribution
3.1.8: Kinetic-Molecular Theory
3.1.12: Molecular Effusion and Diffusion
bomb calorimeter
4.1.2: Calorimetry
bond angle
6.1.6: The VSEPR Model
bond energy
6.1.5: Strength of Covalent Bonds
6.2.1: Localized Electron Model of Covalent
Bondingbond length
6.2.1: Localized Electron Model of Covalent
Bonding
bond order
6.1.4: Resonance Lewis Structures
6.1.5: Strength of Covalent Bonds
bond polarity
6.1.7: Molecular Polarity
bonding pair
6.1.3: Drawing Lewis Structures
6.1.8: A Different Perspective on Drawing Lewis
Structures
Boyle's Law
3.1.3: The Gas Laws
C
calorimeter
4.1.2: Calorimetry
calorimetry
4.1.2: Calorimetry
capillary action
8.1.3: Properties of Liquids
cation
9.3.1: Atomic Structure and Symbolism
6.1.2: Interpreting Lewis Structures
Celsius
9.2.4: Measurements
chalcogen
9.3.3: The Periodic Table
Charles's Law
3.1.3: The Gas Laws
Chem 101A
0.1: What should I know already?
chemical analysis
Topic B- Reactions in Aqueous Solution
chemical change
9.2.3: Physical and Chemical Properties
chemical equation
1.1.1: Chemical Equations
chemical equations
Topic A- Equations, Formulas, and Stoichiometry
0.1: What should I know already?
1.1: Stoichiometry- Chemical Formulas and
Equations
chemical equilibrium
7.1.1: The Concept of Equilibrium
chemical formulas
0.3: Atoms, Molecules, and Ions
chemical nomenclature
0.3: Atoms, Molecules, and Ions
chemical properties
0.2: Essential Ideas of Chemistry
chemical property
9.2.3: Physical and Chemical Properties
8.1.1: A Molecular Comparison of Gases, Liquids,
and Solids
chemical reactions
1.1: Stoichiometry- Chemical Formulas and
Equations
2.1: Reactions in Aqueous Solution

2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/211848chemical symbol
9.3.1: Atomic Structure and Symbolism
chemistry
0.1: What should I know already?
0.2: Essential Ideas of Chemistry
9.2.1: Chemistry in Context
chemistry fundamentals
Topic A- Equations, Formulas, and Stoichiometry
chemistry principles
0.3: Atoms, Molecules, and Ions
coefficient
1.1.1: Chemical Equations
cohesive force
8.1.3: Properties of Liquids
collision frequency
3.1.8: Kinetic-Molecular Theory
combination reaction
1.1.2: Some Simple Patterns of Chemical Reactivity
combustion analysis
Topic A- Equations, Formulas, and Stoichiometry
1.1.5: Empirical Formulas from Analysis
combustion reaction
1.1.2: Some Simple Patterns of Chemical Reactivity
compound
9.2.2: Phases and Classification of Matter
compressibility
3.1.1: Characteristics of Gases
concentration
2.1.6: Concentration of Solutions
concentration units
2.1: Reactions in Aqueous Solution
condensed phase
8.1.1: A Molecular Comparison of Gases, Liquids,
and Solids
conjugate acid
7.2.1: Brønsted–Lowry Acids and Bases
7.2.2: Autoionization of Water
conjugate base
7.2.1: Brønsted–Lowry Acids and Bases
7.2.2: Autoionization of Water
conservation of mass
1.1: Stoichiometry- Chemical Formulas and
Equations
constructive interference
5.1.4: The Wave Behavior of Matter
conversion factors
9.2.6: Mathematical Treatment of Measurement
Results
cooling curve
8.1.5: Phase Changes
coordinate covalent bond
6.1.3: Drawing Lewis Structures
6.1.8: A Different Perspective on Drawing Lewis
Structures
Coulombic force
8.1.4: Properties of Solids
covalent atomic radius
5.2.3: Sizes of Atoms and Ions
covalent bond
0.1: What should I know already?
9.3.4: Molecular and Ionic Compounds
8.1.1: A Molecular Comparison of Gases, Liquids,
and Solidscovalent compound
9.3.4: Molecular and Ionic Compounds
critical point
8.1.6: Phase Diagrams
critical pressure
8.1.6: Phase Diagrams
critical temperature
8.1.6: Phase Diagrams
cryogenic liquids
3.1.13: Real Gases - Deviations from Ideal Behavior
cubic centimeter
9.2.4: Measurements
cubic meter
9.2.4: Measurements
D
Dalton unit
9.3.1: Atomic Structure and Symbolism
Dalton's Law of Partial Pressure
3.1.6: Gas Mixtures and Partial Pressures
3.1.7: Partial Pressures and Stoichiometry
de Broglie wavelength
5.1.4: The Wave Behavior of Matter
Debye (unit)
6.1.7: Molecular Polarity
decomposition reaction
1.1.2: Some Simple Patterns of Chemical Reactivity
degenerate orbitals
5.1.6: 3D Representation of Orbitals
density
9.2.4: Measurements
destructive interference
5.1.4: The Wave Behavior of Matter
diffusion
3.1.12: Molecular Effusion and Diffusion
dilution problems
Topic B- Reactions in Aqueous Solution
dimensional analysis
9.2.6: Mathematical Treatment of Measurement
Results
dipole moment
6.1.6: The VSEPR Model
6.1.7: Molecular Polarity
dispersion forces
8.1.2: Intermolecular Forces
8.1.4: Properties of Solids
Distribution of Measurements
3.1.9: Understanding the Value Distribution of a
Variable
3.1.10: Molecular Speed Distribution
3.1.11: Kinetic Energy Distribution
double bond
6.1.4: Resonance Lewis Structures
E
effective nuclear charge
5.2.2: Shielding and Effective Nuclear Charge
5.2.3: Sizes of Atoms and Ions
effusion
3.1.12: Molecular Effusion and Diffusion
electrolyte
2.1.1: General Properties of Aqueous Solutionselectromagnetic radiation
5.1.1: The Wave Nature of Light
electron affinity
5.2.5: Electron Affinities
electron configuration
5.1.8: Electron Configurations
electron density
5.1.6: 3D Representation of Orbitals
electron sea
8.1.4: Properties of Solids
electron shielding
5.2.2: Shielding and Effective Nuclear Charge
electron spin
5.1.7: Many-Electron Atoms
electrons
0.1: What should I know already?
electrostatic force
8.1.4: Properties of Solids
element
9.2.2: Phases and Classification of Matter
emission spectrum
5.1.3: Atomic Emission Spectra and the Bohr Model
empirical formula
9.3.2: Chemical Formulas
1.1.4: Empirical and Molecular Formulas
1.1.5: Empirical Formulas from Analysis
empirical formulas
Topic A- Equations, Formulas, and Stoichiometry
1.1: Stoichiometry- Chemical Formulas and
Equations
endothermic
6.1.4: Resonance Lewis Structures
6.1.5: Strength of Covalent Bonds
8.1.5: Phase Changes
endothermic process
5.2.5: Electron Affinities
endpoint
2.1.7: Solution Stoichiometry and Chemical Analysis
enthalpy of fusion
8.1.5: Phase Changes
enthalpy of sublimation
8.1.5: Phase Changes
equilibrium constant
7.1.2: The Equilibrium Constant
equivalence point
2.1.7: Solution Stoichiometry and Chemical Analysis
exact number
9.2.5: Measurement Uncertainty, Accuracy, and
Precision
excited state
5.1.3: Atomic Emission Spectra and the Bohr Model
exothermic
6.1.4: Resonance Lewis Structures
6.1.5: Strength of Covalent Bonds
8.1.5: Phase Changes
exothermic process
5.2.5: Electron Affinities
extensive property
9.2.3: Physical and Chemical Properties

3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/211848F
Fahrenheit
9.2.6: Mathematical Treatment of Measurement
Results
formal charge
6.1.3: Drawing Lewis Structures
6.1.8: A Different Perspective on Drawing Lewis
Structures
formula mass
1.1.4: Empirical and Molecular Formulas
frequency
5.1.1: The Wave Nature of Light
fugacity
7.1.2: The Equilibrium Constant
fundamental unit of charge
9.3.1: Atomic Structure and Symbolism
fusion
8.1.5: Phase Changes
G
gas
9.2.2: Phases and Classification of Matter
3.1.1: Characteristics of Gases
gas constant
3.1.4: The Ideal Gas Equation
general chemistry
0.3: Atoms, Molecules, and Ions
general gas equation
3.1.4: The Ideal Gas Equation
goiter
9.3.1: Atomic Structure and Symbolism
Graham's law
3.1.12: Molecular Effusion and Diffusion
ground state
5.1.3: Atomic Emission Spectra and the Bohr Model
group
9.3.3: The Periodic Table
H
halogen
9.3.3: The Periodic Table
5.2.8: Group Trends for Selected Nonmetals
Heating curve
8.1.5: Phase Changes
Heisenberg uncertainty principle
5.1.4: The Wave Behavior of Matter
Hess's law
7.1.2: The Equilibrium Constant
heterogeneous equilibria
7.1.3: Heterogeneous Equilibria
heterogeneous mixture
9.2.2: Phases and Classification of Matter
homogeneous equilibria
7.1.3: Heterogeneous Equilibria
homogeneous mixture
9.2.2: Phases and Classification of Matter
Hund's rule
5.1.8: Electron Configurations
hybrid orbital
6.2.1: Localized Electron Model of Covalent
Bonding
6.2.2: Hybrid Atomic Orbitalshybridization
6.2.1: Localized Electron Model of Covalent
Bonding
6.2.2: Hybrid Atomic Orbitals
hydride ion
5.2.7: Group Trends for the Active Metals
hydrogen bond
8.1.2: Intermolecular Forces
hydrogen bonding
8.1.4: Properties of Solids
hypothesis
9.2.1: Chemistry in Context
I
ideal gas
3.1.4: The Ideal Gas Equation
ideal gas law
3.1.4: The Ideal Gas Equation
3.1.5: Gas V olumes and Chemical Reactions
impulse
3.1.8: Kinetic-Molecular Theory
induced dipole
8.1.2: Intermolecular Forces
inert gas
9.3.3: The Periodic Table
inner transition metal
9.3.3: The Periodic Table
inorganic compounds
Topic A- Equations, Formulas, and Stoichiometry
insoluble
2.1.2: Precipitation and Solubility Rules
instantaneous dipole
8.1.2: Intermolecular Forces
intensive property
9.2.3: Physical and Chemical Properties
intermolecular force
8.1.1: A Molecular Comparison of Gases, Liquids,
and Solids
8.1.2: Intermolecular Forces
International System of Units
9.2.4: Measurements
ion
9.3.1: Atomic Structure and Symbolism
6.1.2: Interpreting Lewis Structures
ionic bond
0.1: What should I know already?
9.3.4: Molecular and Ionic Compounds
6.1.2: Interpreting Lewis Structures
ionic compound
9.3.4: Molecular and Ionic Compounds
ionic compounds
0.3: Atoms, Molecules, and Ions
ionic radius
5.2.3: Sizes of Atoms and Ions
ionic solid
8.1.4: Properties of Solids
ionization energy
5.2.4: Ionization Energy
isoelectronic series
5.2.3: Sizes of Atoms and Ions
isomers
9.3.2: Chemical FormulasK
Kelvin
9.2.4: Measurements
kilogram
9.2.4: Measurements
kinetic energy
8.1.1: A Molecular Comparison of Gases, Liquids,
and Solids
kinetic molecular theory
3.1.8: Kinetic-Molecular Theory
L
lanthanide
9.3.3: The Periodic Table
Lattice Energy
6.1.2: Interpreting Lewis Structures
8.1.4: Properties of Solids
law
9.2.1: Chemistry in Context
law of conservation of matter
9.2.2: Phases and Classification of Matter
law of mass action
7.1.2: The Equilibrium Constant
Le Chatelier's principle
7.1.6: Le Chatelier's Principle
learning objectives
Topic B- Reactions in Aqueous Solution
length
9.2.4: Measurements
Lewis electron dot symbol
6.1.1: Covalent Bonding Fundamentals
Lewis structure
6.1.3: Drawing Lewis Structures
6.1.8: A Different Perspective on Drawing Lewis
Structures
limiting reactant
1.1.7: Limiting Reactants
limiting reactants
Topic A- Equations, Formulas, and Stoichiometry
1.1: Stoichiometry- Chemical Formulas and
Equations
line spectrum
5.1.3: Atomic Emission Spectra and the Bohr Model
linear
6.1.6: The VSEPR Model
liquefaction
3.1.13: Real Gases - Deviations from Ideal Behavior
liquid
9.2.2: Phases and Classification of Matter
3.1.1: Characteristics of Gases
liter
9.2.4: Measurements
lone pair
6.1.3: Drawing Lewis Structures
6.1.8: A Different Perspective on Drawing Lewis
Structures
lower electron orbital
5.2.3: Sizes of Atoms and Ions
luster
8.1.4: Properties of Solids

4 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/211848M
macroscopic domain
9.2.1: Chemistry in Context
magnetic quantum number
5.1.5: Quantum Mechanics and Atomic Orbitals
manometer
3.1.2: Pressure
mass
9.2.2: Phases and Classification of Matter
mass number
9.3.1: Atomic Structure and Symbolism
matter
0.2: Essential Ideas of Chemistry
matter composition
0.3: Atoms, Molecules, and Ions
mean free path
3.1.12: Molecular Effusion and Diffusion
measurement uncertainty
0.2: Essential Ideas of Chemistry
measurements
0.2: Essential Ideas of Chemistry
meniscus
8.1.3: Properties of Liquids
metal
9.3.3: The Periodic Table
5.2.6: Metals, Nonmetals, and Metalloids
metallic atomic radius
5.2.3: Sizes of Atoms and Ions
metallic character
5.2.6: Metals, Nonmetals, and Metalloids
metallic solid
8.1.4: Properties of Solids
metalloid
9.3.3: The Periodic Table
5.2.6: Metals, Nonmetals, and Metalloids
meter
9.2.4: Measurements
microscopic domain
9.2.1: Chemistry in Context
milliliter
9.2.4: Measurements
millimeters of mercury
3.1.2: Pressure
mixture
9.2.2: Phases and Classification of Matter
molar mass
1.1.3: Avogadro's Number and the Mole
1.1.4: Empirical and Molecular Formulas
molar volume
5.2.1: Development of the Periodic Table
molarity
Topic B- Reactions in Aqueous Solution
2.1.6: Concentration of Solutions
mole
0.1: What should I know already?
1.1.3: Avogadro's Number and the Mole
mole fraction
3.1.6: Gas Mixtures and Partial Pressures
3.1.7: Partial Pressures and Stoichiometry
mole ratio
1.1.1: Chemical Equationsmolecular compound
9.3.4: Molecular and Ionic Compounds
molecular compounds
0.3: Atoms, Molecules, and Ions
molecular formula
9.3.2: Chemical Formulas
1.1.4: Empirical and Molecular Formulas
molecular formulas
Topic A- Equations, Formulas, and Stoichiometry
molecular identity
0.3: Atoms, Molecules, and Ions
molecular mass
1.1: Stoichiometry- Chemical Formulas and
Equations
1.1.3: Avogadro's Number and the Mole
molecular orbital
6.2.3: Orbital Overlap in Multiple Bonds
molecular orbital theory
6.2.4: Molecular Orbital Theory
molecular solid
8.1.4: Properties of Solids
molecule
9.2.2: Phases and Classification of Matter
momentum transfer
3.1.8: Kinetic-Molecular Theory
monatomic ion
9.3.4: Molecular and Ionic Compounds
N
net ionic equation
2.1.5: Writing Net Ionic Equations
net ionic equations
Topic B- Reactions in Aqueous Solution
2.1: Reactions in Aqueous Solution
network solid
8.1.4: Properties of Solids
neutral
7.2.3: pH and pOH
neutralization
2.1.3: Acid-Base Reactions
neutralization reaction
2.1.2: Precipitation and Solubility Rules
neutrons
0.1: What should I know already?
noble gas
9.3.3: The Periodic Table
nomenclature
9.3.5: Chemical Nomenclature
nonelectrolyte
2.1.1: General Properties of Aqueous Solutions
nonmetal
9.3.3: The Periodic Table
5.2.6: Metals, Nonmetals, and Metalloids
5.2.8: Group Trends for Selected Nonmetals
nonpolar compound
2.1.1: General Properties of Aqueous Solutions
nonpolar covalent bond
2.1.1: General Properties of Aqueous Solutions
nutritional calorie
4.1.2: CalorimetryO
octahedral
6.1.6: The VSEPR Model
octave
5.2.1: Development of the Periodic Table
octet rule
6.1.1: Covalent Bonding Fundamentals
orbital energy
5.1.6: 3D Representation of Orbitals
5.1.7: Many-Electron Atoms
overtones
5.1.4: The Wave Behavior of Matter
oxyacid
9.3.5: Chemical Nomenclature
7.2.4: Acid Strength
oxyanion
9.3.4: Molecular and Ionic Compounds
P
partial pressure
3.1.6: Gas Mixtures and Partial Pressures
3.1.7: Partial Pressures and Stoichiometry
parts per billion
2.1.6: Concentration of Solutions
parts per million
2.1.6: Concentration of Solutions
Pascal unit
3.1.2: Pressure
Pauli exclusion principle
5.1.7: Many-Electron Atoms
5.1.8: Electron Configurations
penetration
5.2.2: Shielding and Effective Nuclear Charge
percent ionization
7.2.4: Acid Strength
percent yield
Topic A- Equations, Formulas, and Stoichiometry
1.1.7: Limiting Reactants
period
9.3.3: The Periodic Table
periodic law
9.3.3: The Periodic Table
periodic table
0.3: Atoms, Molecules, and Ions
9.3.3: The Periodic Table
peroxide
5.2.8: Group Trends for Selected Nonmetals
pH
7.2.3: pH and pOH
phase diagram
8.1.6: Phase Diagrams
photoelectric effect
5.1.2: The Particle Nature of Light
photon
5.1.2: The Particle Nature of Light
physical change
9.2.3: Physical and Chemical Properties
physical properties
0.2: Essential Ideas of Chemistry

5 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/211848physical property
9.2.3: Physical and Chemical Properties
8.1.1: A Molecular Comparison of Gases, Liquids,
and Solids
pi bond
6.2.3: Orbital Overlap in Multiple Bonds
plasma
9.2.2: Phases and Classification of Matter
pnictogen
9.3.3: The Periodic Table
pOH
7.2.3: pH and pOH
polar compound
2.1.1: General Properties of Aqueous Solutions
polar covalent bond
2.1.1: General Properties of Aqueous Solutions
6.1.7: Molecular Polarity
Polarizability
8.1.2: Intermolecular Forces
polyatomic ion
9.3.4: Molecular and Ionic Compounds
position of equilibrium
7.1.6: Le Chatelier's Principle
precipitate
2.1.2: Precipitation and Solubility Rules
precipitation
2.1.5: Writing Net Ionic Equations
precipitation reaction
2.1.2: Precipitation and Solubility Rules
precipitation reactions
Topic B- Reactions in Aqueous Solution
precipitation rules
2.1: Reactions in Aqueous Solution
precision
0.2: Essential Ideas of Chemistry
9.2.5: Measurement Uncertainty, Accuracy, and
Precision
pressure
3.1.2: Pressure
principle quantum number
5.1.5: Quantum Mechanics and Atomic Orbitals
principle shell
5.1.5: Quantum Mechanics and Atomic Orbitals
Probability density
5.1.6: 3D Representation of Orbitals
product
1.1.1: Chemical Equations
products
1.1: Stoichiometry- Chemical Formulas and
Equations
protons
0.1: What should I know already?
pseudo noble gas configuration
5.2.4: Ionization Energy
pure substance
9.2.2: Phases and Classification of Matter
Q
quantitative analysis
2.1.7: Solution Stoichiometry and Chemical Analysis
quantum
5.1.2: The Particle Nature of Lightquantum mechanics
5.1.5: Quantum Mechanics and Atomic Orbitals
R
reactant
1.1.1: Chemical Equations
reactants
1.1: Stoichiometry- Chemical Formulas and
Equations
reaction quotient
7.1.5: Applications of Equilibrium Constants
reaction stoichiometry
1.1: Stoichiometry- Chemical Formulas and
Equations
reducing agent
2.1.2: Precipitation and Solubility Rules
representative element
9.3.3: The Periodic Table
rounding
9.2.5: Measurement Uncertainty, Accuracy, and
Precision
S
salt
2.1.2: Precipitation and Solubility Rules
scientific method
0.2: Essential Ideas of Chemistry
9.2.1: Chemistry in Context
second
9.2.4: Measurements
seed crystal
8.1.5: Phase Changes
seesaw
6.1.6: The VSEPR Model
series
9.3.3: The Periodic Table
shared electron pair
6.1.4: Resonance Lewis Structures
SI units
9.2.4: Measurements
sigma bond
6.2.3: Orbital Overlap in Multiple Bonds
significant figures
9.2.5: Measurement Uncertainty, Accuracy, and
Precision
single bond
6.1.4: Resonance Lewis Structures
solid
9.2.2: Phases and Classification of Matter
3.1.1: Characteristics of Gases
solubility
2.1.2: Precipitation and Solubility Rules
solubility rules
Topic B- Reactions in Aqueous Solution
2.1: Reactions in Aqueous Solution
soluble
2.1.2: Precipitation and Solubility Rules
solutes
2.1: Reactions in Aqueous Solution
solution stoichiometry
Topic B- Reactions in Aqueous Solution
2.1: Reactions in Aqueous Solutionsolvents
2.1: Reactions in Aqueous Solution
sp hybrid orbital
6.2.2: Hybrid Atomic Orbitals
sp2 hybrid orbital
6.2.2: Hybrid Atomic Orbitals
sp3 hybrid orbital
6.2.2: Hybrid Atomic Orbitals
sp3d hybrid orbital
6.2.2: Hybrid Atomic Orbitals
sp3d2 hybrid orbital
6.2.2: Hybrid Atomic Orbitals
spatial isomers
9.3.2: Chemical Formulas
speed
5.1.1: The Wave Nature of Light
speed of light
5.1.1: The Wave Nature of Light
square pyramidal
6.1.6: The VSEPR Model
standard barometric pressure
3.1.2: Pressure
standard molar volume
3.1.4: The Ideal Gas Equation
standard solution
2.1.7: Solution Stoichiometry and Chemical Analysis
standard temperature and pressure
3.1.4: The Ideal Gas Equation
standing wave
5.1.4: The Wave Behavior of Matter
stock solution
2.1.6: Concentration of Solutions
stoichiometry
Topic A- Equations, Formulas, and Stoichiometry
1.1: Stoichiometry- Chemical Formulas and
Equations
1.1.1: Chemical Equations
1.1.6: Reaction Stoichiometry
STP
3.1.4: The Ideal Gas Equation
stress
7.1.6: Le Chatelier's Principle
strong acid
2.1.2: Precipitation and Solubility Rules
strong base
2.1.2: Precipitation and Solubility Rules
strong electrolyte
2.1.1: General Properties of Aqueous Solutions
structural formula
9.3.2: Chemical Formulas
structural isomers
9.3.2: Chemical Formulas
sublimation
8.1.5: Phase Changes
subshell
5.1.5: Quantum Mechanics and Atomic Orbitals
sulfide
5.2.8: Group Trends for Selected Nonmetals
supercooled liquid
8.1.5: Phase Changes

6 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/211848supercritical fluid
8.1.6: Phase Diagrams
superheated liquid
8.1.5: Phase Changes
superoxide
5.2.8: Group Trends for Selected Nonmetals
surface tension
8.1.3: Properties of Liquids
surfactant
8.1.3: Properties of Liquids
surroundings
4.1.2: Calorimetry
symbolic domain
9.2.1: Chemistry in Context
system
4.1.2: Calorimetry
T
temperature
3.1.2: Pressure
tetrahedral
6.1.6: The VSEPR Model
theoretical yield
1.1.7: Limiting Reactants
theory
9.2.1: Chemistry in Context
titrant
2.1.7: Solution Stoichiometry and Chemical Analysis
titration
2.1.7: Solution Stoichiometry and Chemical Analysis
torr
3.1.2: Pressure
transition metal
9.3.3: The Periodic Tabletriad
5.2.1: Development of the Periodic Table
trigonal bipyramidal
6.1.6: The VSEPR Model
trigonal planar
6.1.6: The VSEPR Model
trigonal pyramidal
6.1.6: The VSEPR Model
triple bond
6.1.4: Resonance Lewis Structures
triple point
8.1.6: Phase Diagrams
U
uncertainty
9.2.5: Measurement Uncertainty, Accuracy, and
Precision
unified atomic mass unit
9.3.1: Atomic Structure and Symbolism
unit
9.2.4: Measurements
V
valence bond theory
6.2.1: Localized Electron Model of Covalent
Bonding
6.2.2: Hybrid Atomic Orbitals
valence electrons
5.1.8: Electron Configurations
valence shell electron pair repulsion
theory
6.1.6: The VSEPR Model
van der Waals equation
3.1.13: Real Gases - Deviations from Ideal Behaviorvan der Waals force
8.1.2: Intermolecular Forces
van der Waals radius
5.2.3: Sizes of Atoms and Ions
vapor
3.1.1: Characteristics of Gases
viscosity
8.1.3: Properties of Liquids
volume
9.2.4: Measurements
3.1.1: Characteristics of Gases
3.1.2: Pressure
VSEPR
6.1.6: The VSEPR Model
W
water–gas shift reaction
7.1.4: Equilibrium Stoichiometry Calculations
wave
5.1.1: The Wave Nature of Light
wavefunction
5.1.5: Quantum Mechanics and Atomic Orbitals
wavelength
5.1.1: The Wave Nature of Light
weak acid
2.1.2: Precipitation and Solubility Rules
7.2.4: Acid Strength
weak base
2.1.2: Precipitation and Solubility Rules
weak electrolyte
2.1.1: General Properties of Aqueous Solutions
weight
9.2.2: Phases and Classification of Matter

1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/279409Glossary
Sample Word 1 | Sample Definition 1

1 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/417330Detailed Licensing
Overview
Title: Chemistry 101A
Webpages: 128
Applicable Restrictions: Noncommercial
All licenses found:
CC BY-NC-SA 4.0: 78.9% (101 pages)
CC BY 4.0: 13.3% (17 pages)
Undeclared: 7% (9 pages)
CC BY-NC 4.0: 0.8% (1 page)
By Page
Chemistry 101A - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
Front Matter - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
TitlePage - Undeclared
InfoPage - Undeclared
InfoTitle - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
Table of Contents - Undeclared
Licensing - Undeclared
Course Objectives - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
TitlePage - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
Topic A- Equations, Formulas, and Stoichiometry - CC
BY-NC-SA 4.0
Foundations - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
0.1: What should I know already? - CC BY-NC-SA
4.0
0.2: Essential Ideas of Chemistry - CC BY 4.0
9.2.1: Chemistry in Context - CC BY 4.0
9.2.2: Phases and Classification of Matter - CC
BY 4.0
9.2.3: Physical and Chemical Properties - CC
BY 4.0
9.2.4: Measurements - CC BY 4.0
9.2.5: Measurement Uncertainty, Accuracy,
and Precision - CC BY 4.0
9.2.6: Mathematical Treatment of
Measurement Results - CC BY 4.0
0.3: Atoms, Molecules, and Ions - CC BY 4.0
9.3.1: Atomic Structure and Symbolism - CC
BY 4.0
9.3.2: Chemical Formulas - CC BY 4.0
9.3.3: The Periodic Table - CC BY 4.0
9.3.4: Molecular and Ionic Compounds - CC
BY 4.0
9.3.5: Chemical Nomenclature - CC BY 4.01.1: Stoichiometry- Chemical Formulas and
Equations - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
1.1.1: Chemical Equations - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
1.1.2: Some Simple Patterns of Chemical
Reactivity - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
1.1.3: Avogadro's Number and the Mole - CC BYNC-SA 4.0
1.1.4: Empirical and Molecular Formulas - CC
BY-NC-SA 4.0
1.1.5: Empirical Formulas from Analysis - CC BYNC-SA 4.0
1.1.6: Reaction Stoichiometry - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
1.1.7: Limiting Reactants - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
Topic B- Reactions in Aqueous Solution - CC BY-NC-SA
4.0
2.1: Reactions in Aqueous Solution - CC BY-NC-SA
4.0
2.1.1: General Properties of Aqueous Solutions CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
2.1.1.1: Units of Concentration - Undeclared
2.1.2: Precipitation and Solubility Rules - CC BY
4.0
2.1.3: Acid-Base Reactions - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
2.1.4: Other Common Reactions - CC BY-NC-SA
4.0
2.1.5: Writing Net Ionic Equations - CC BY-NCSA 4.0
2.1.6: Concentration of Solutions - CC BY-NC-SA
4.0
2.1.7: Solution Stoichiometry and Chemical
Analysis - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
Topic C- Gas Laws and Kinetic Molecular Theory - CC
BY-NC-SA 4.0

2 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/4173303.1: Gases - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
3.1.1: Characteristics of Gases - CC BY-NC-SA
4.0
3.1.2: Pressure - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
3.1.3: The Gas Laws - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
3.1.4: The Ideal Gas Equation - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
3.1.5: Gas V olumes and Chemical Reactions - CC
BY-NC-SA 4.0
3.1.6: Gas Mixtures and Partial Pressures - CC
BY-NC-SA 4.0
3.1.7: Partial Pressures and Stoichiometry - CC
BY-NC-SA 4.0
3.1.8: Kinetic-Molecular Theory - CC BY-NC-SA
4.0
3.1.9: Understanding the Value Distribution of a
Variable - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
3.1.10: Molecular Speed Distribution - CC BYNC-SA 4.0
3.1.11: Kinetic Energy Distribution - CC BY-NCSA 4.0
3.1.12: Molecular Effusion and Diffusion - CC
BY-NC-SA 4.0
3.1.13: Real Gases - Deviations from Ideal
Behavior - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
Topic D- Thermochemistry - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
4.1: Thermochemistry - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
4.1.1: Energy, Heat and Work - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
4.1.2: Calorimetry - CC BY 4.0
4.1.3: The First Law of Thermodynamics - CC
BY-NC 4.0
4.1.4: Energy and Chemical Change - CC BY-NCSA 4.0
4.1.5: Enthalpy – A Modified Energy of Reaction
- CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
4.1.6: Putting it All Together - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
4.1.7: Tabulated Enthalpy Values - CC BY-NC-SA
4.0
4.1.8: Hess's Law - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
Topic E- Atomic Structure - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
5.1: Electronic Structure of Atoms - CC BY-NC-SA
4.0
5.1.1: The Wave Nature of Light - CC BY-NC-SA
4.0
5.1.2: The Particle Nature of Light - CC BY-NCSA 4.0
5.1.3: Atomic Emission Spectra and the Bohr
Model - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
5.1.4: The Wave Behavior of Matter - CC BY-NCSA 4.05.1.5: Quantum Mechanics and Atomic Orbitals CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
5.1.6: 3D Representation of Orbitals - CC BY-NCSA 4.0
5.1.7: Many-Electron Atoms - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
5.1.8: Electron Configurations - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
5.2: Periodic Properties of the Elements - CC BY-NCSA 4.0
5.2.1: Development of the Periodic Table - CC
BY-NC-SA 4.0
5.2.2: Shielding and Effective Nuclear Charge CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
5.2.3: Sizes of Atoms and Ions - CC BY-NC-SA
4.0
5.2.4: Ionization Energy - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
5.2.5: Electron Affinities - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
5.2.6: Metals, Nonmetals, and Metalloids - CC
BY-NC-SA 4.0
5.2.7: Group Trends for the Active Metals - CC
BY-NC-SA 4.0
5.2.8: Group Trends for Selected Nonmetals - CC
BY-NC-SA 4.0
Topic F- Molecular Structure - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
6.1: Basic Concepts of Covalent Bonding - CC BYNC-SA 4.0
6.1.1: Covalent Bonding Fundamentals - CC BYNC-SA 4.0
6.1.2: Interpreting Lewis Structures - CC BY-NCSA 4.0
6.1.3: Drawing Lewis Structures - CC BY-NC-SA
4.0
6.1.4: Resonance Lewis Structures - CC BY-NCSA 4.0
6.1.5: Strength of Covalent Bonds - CC BY-NC-SA
4.0
6.1.6: The VSEPR Model - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
6.1.7: Molecular Polarity - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
6.1.8: A Different Perspective on Drawing Lewis
Structures - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
6.2: Orbitals and Bonding Theories - CC BY-NC-SA
4.0
6.2.1: Localized Electron Model of Covalent
Bonding - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
6.2.2: Hybrid Atomic Orbitals - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
6.2.3: Orbital Overlap in Multiple Bonds - CC BYNC-SA 4.0
6.2.4: Molecular Orbital Theory - CC BY 4.0
Topic G- Chemical Equilibrium - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0

3 https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/4173307.1: Chemical Equilibrium - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
7.1.1: The Concept of Equilibrium - CC BY-NCSA 4.0
7.1.2: The Equilibrium Constant - CC BY-NC-SA
4.0
7.1.3: Heterogeneous Equilibria - CC BY-NC-SA
4.0
7.1.4: Equilibrium Stoichiometry Calculations CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
7.1.5: Applications of Equilibrium Constants - CC
BY-NC-SA 4.0
7.1.6: Le Chatelier's Principle - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
7.2: Introduction to Acid–Base Equilibria - CC BYNC-SA 4.0
7.2.1: Brønsted–Lowry Acids and Bases - CC BYNC-SA 4.0
7.2.2: Autoionization of Water - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
7.2.3: pH and pOH - CC BY 4.07.2.4: Acid Strength - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
Topic H - Condensed States and Attractive Forces
Between Particles - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
8.1: Condensed States and Intermolecular Forces CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
8.1.1: A Molecular Comparison of Gases, Liquids,
and Solids - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
8.1.2: Intermolecular Forces - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
8.1.3: Properties of Liquids - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
8.1.4: Properties of Solids - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
8.1.5: Phase Changes - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
8.1.6: Phase Diagrams - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
8.1.7: The Born-Haber Cycle - Undeclared
Back Matter - CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
Index - Undeclared
Glossary - Undeclared
Detailed Licensing - Undeclared