PHYSICS
P
ART – II
TEXTBOOK FOR CLASS XII

PHYSICS
P
ART – II
TEXTBOOK FOR CLASS XII

First Edition
March 2007 Chaitra 1928
Reprinted
December 2007, December 2008,
December 2009, January 2011,
January 2012, December 2012,
November 2013, December 2014,
December 2015, February 2017,
December 2017, February 2018,
February 2019, October 2019,
January 2021 and November 2021
Revised Edition
November 2022 Agrahayana 1944
Reprinted
March 2024 Chaitra 1946
December 2024 Pausha 1946
December 2025 Agrahayana 1947
PD 165T HK
© National Council of Educational
Research and Training, 2007, 2022
`105.00
Printed on 80 GSM paper with NCERT
watermark
Published at the Publication Division by the
Secretary, National Council of Educational
Research and Training, Sri Aurobindo
Marg, New Delhi 110 016 and printed at
Shagun Offset Press, Plot No. 82, Ecotech
12, Greater Noida 201 009 (UP)ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
qNo part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system
or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,
photocopying, recording or otherwise without the prior permission of the
publisher.
qThis book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade,
be lent, re-sold, hired out or otherwise disposed of without the publisher’s
consent, in any form of binding or cover other than that in which it is
published.
qThe correct price of this publication is the price printed on this page, Any revised
price indicated by a rubber stamp or by a sticker or by any other means is incorrect
and should be unacceptable.
OFFICES OF THE PUBLICA TION
DIVISION, NCERT
NCERT Campus
Sri Aurobindo Marg
New Delhi 110 016 Phone : 011-26562708
108, 100 Feet Road
Hosdakere Halli Extension
Banashankari III Stage
Bengaluru 560 085 Phone : 080-26725740
Navjivan Trust Building
P.O.Navjivan
Ahmedabad 380 014 Phone : 079-27541446
CWC Campus
Opp. Dhankal Bus Stop
Panihati
Kolkata 700 114 Phone : 033-25530454
CWC Complex
Maligaon
Guwahati 781 021 Phone : 0361-2674869
Publication Team
Head, Publication :M.V. Srinivasan
Division
Chief Editor :Bijnan Sutar
Chief Business :Amitabh Kumar
Manager
Chief Production :Deepak Jaiswal
Officer (In charge)
Assistant Editor :R. N. Bhardwaj
Production Assistant :Manoj Kumar
Cover, Layout and Illustrations
Shweta RaoISBN 81-7450-631-4 (Part I)
ISBN 81-7450-671-3 (Part II)12090 – PHYSICS PART-II
Textbook for Class XII

FOREWORD
The National Curriculum Framework (NCF), 2005 recommends that children’s life at school must
be linked to their life outside the school. This principle marks a departure from the legacy of bookish
learning which continues to shape our system and causes a gap between the school, home and
community. The syllabi and textbooks developed on the basis of NCF signify an attempt to implement
this basic idea. They also attempt to discourage rote learning and the maintenance of sharp
boundaries between dif ferent subject ar eas. W e hope these measur es will take us significantly
further in the direction of a child-centred system of education outlined in the National Policy on
Education (NPE), 1986.
The success of this effort depends on the steps that school principals and teachers will take to
encourage children to reflect on their own learning and to pursue imaginative activities and questions.
We must r ecognise that, given space, time and fr eedom, childr en generate new knowledge by engaging
with the information passed on to them by adults. Treating the prescribed textbook as the sole basis
of examination is one of the key reasons why other resources and sites of learning are ignored.
Inculcating creativity and initiative is possible if we perceive and treat children as participants in
learning, not as receivers of a fixed body of knowledge.
These aims imply considerable change i n school routines and mode of functioning. Flexibility in
the daily time-table is as necessary as rigour in implementing the annual calendar so that the
required number of teaching days are actually devoted to teaching. The methods used for teaching
and evaluation will also determine how effective this textbook proves for making children’s life at
school a happy experience, rather than a source of stress or boredom. Syllabus designers have tried
to address the problem of curricular burden by restructuring and reorienting knowledge at different
stages with greater consideration for child psychology and the time available for teaching. The textbook
attempts to enhance this endeavour by giving higher priority and space to opportunities for
contemplation and wondering, discussion in small groups, and activities requiring hands-on
experience.
The National Council of Educational Resear ch and T raining (NCER T) appr eciates the har d
work done by the textbook development committee r esponsible for this book. W e wish to thank the
Chairperson of the advisory gr oup in science and mathematics, Pr ofessor J.V . Narlikar and the
Chief Advisor for this book, Pr ofessor A.W . Joshi for guiding the work of this committee. Several
teachers contributed to the development of this textbook; we are grateful to their principals for
making this possible. W e are indebted to the institutions and or ganisations which have gener ously
permitted us to draw upon their r esour ces, material and personnel. W e are especially grateful to
the members of the National Monitoring Committee, appointed by the Department of Secondary
and Higher Education, Ministry of Human Resource Development under the Chairpersonship of
Professor Mrinal Miri and Pr ofessor G.P . Deshpande, for their valuable time and contribution. As
an organisation committed to systemic reform and continuous improvement in the quality of its
products, NCER T welcomes comments and suggestions which will enable us to undertake further
revision and refinement.
Director
New Delhi National Council of Educational
20 November 2006 Research and Training

RATIONALISATION OF CONTENT IN THE TEXTBOOKS
In view of the COVID-19 pandemic, it is imperative to reduce content load on
students. The National Education Policy 2020, also emphasises reducing the
content load and providing opportunities for experiential learning with creative
mindset. In this background, the NCERT has undertaken the exercise to rationalise
the textbooks across all classes. Learning Outcomes already developed by the NCERT
across classes have been taken into consideration in this exercise.
Contents of the textbooks have been rationalised in view of the following:
•Overlapping with similar content included in other subject areas in the same
class
•Similar content included in the lower or higher class in the same subject
•Difficulty level
•Content, which is easily accessible to students without much interventions
from teachers and can be learned by children through self-learning or peer-
learning
•Content, which is irrelevant in the present context
This present edition, is a reformatted version after carrying out the changes
given above.

PREF ACE
It gives me pleasure to place this book in the hands of the students, teachers and the
public at large (whose role cannot be overlooked). It is a natural sequel to the Class XI
textbook which was brought out in 2006. This book is also a trimmed version of the
textbooks which existed so far . The chapter on ther mal and chemical ef fects of curr ent
has been cut out. This topic has also been dropped from the CBSE syllabus. Similarly,
the chapter on communications has been substantially curtailed. It has been rewritten
in an easily comprehensible form.
Although most other chapters have been based on the earlier versions, several parts
and sections in them have been rewritten. The Development Team has been guided by
the feedback received from innumerable teachers across the country.
In producing these books, Class XI as well as Class XII, there has been a basic
change of emphasis. Both the books present physics to students without assuming
that they would pursue this subject beyond the higher secondary level. This new view
has been prompted by the various observations and suggestions made in the National
Curriculum Framework (NCF), 2005. Similarly, in today’s educational scenario where
students can opt for various combinations of subjects, we cannot assume that a physics
student is also studying mathematics. Therefore, physics has to be presented, so to
say, in a stand-alone form.
As in Class XI textbook, some interesting box items have been inserted in many
chapters. They are not meant for teaching or examinations. Their purpose is to catch
the attention of the r eader , to show some applications in daily life or in other ar eas of
science and technology, to suggest a simple experiment, to show connection of concepts
in different areas of physics, and in general, to break the monotony and enliven the
book.
Featur es like Summary, Points to Ponder , Exer cises and Additional Exer cises at
the end of each chapter , and Examples have been r etained. Several concept-based
Exercises have been transferred from end-of-chapter Exercises to Examples with
Solutions in the text. It is hoped that this will make the concepts discussed in the
chapter more comprehensible. Several new examples and exercises have been added.
Students wishing to pursue physics further would find Points to Ponder and Additional
Exercises very useful and thoughtful. To provide resources beyond the textbook and
to encourage eLear ning, each chapter has been pr ovided with some r elevant website
addresses under the title ePhysics . These sites provide additional materials on specific
topics and also provide learners the opportunites for interactive demonstrations/
experiments.
The intricate concepts of physics must be understood, comprehended and
appreciated. Students must learn to ask questions like ‘why’, ‘how’, ‘how do we know
it’. They will find almost always that the question ‘why’ has no answer within the domain
of physics and science in general. But that itself is a learning experience, is it not? On
the other hand, the question ‘how’ has been reasonably well answered by physicists in
the case of most natural phenomena. In fact, with the understanding of how things
happen, it has been possible to make use of many phenomena to create technological
applications for the use of humans.

For example, consider statements in a book, like ‘A negatively charged electron is
attracted by the positively charged plate’, or ‘In this experiment, light (or electron)
behaves like a wave’. Y ou will r ealise that it is not possible to answer ‘why’. This question
belongs to the domain of philosophy or metaphysics. But we can answer ‘how’, we can
find the force acting, we can find the wavelength of the photon (or electron), we can
determine how things behave under different conditions, and we can develop instruments
which will use these phenomena to our advantage.
It has been a pleasure to work for these books at the higher secondary level, along
with a team of members. The Textbook Development Team, the Review Team and Editing
Teams involved college and university teachers, teachers from Indian Institutes of
Technology, scientists from national institutes and laboratories, as well as higher
secondary teachers. The feedback and critical look provided by higher secondary
teachers in the various teams are highly laudable. Most box items were generated by
members of one or the other team, but three of them were generated by friends and
well-wishers not part of any team. W e are thankful to Dr P .N. Sen of Pune, Pr ofessor
Roopmanjari Ghosh of Delhi and Dr Rajesh B Khaparde of Mumbai for allowing us to
use their box items, r espectively in Chapters 3, 4 (Part I) and 9 (Part II). W e are very
thankful to the members of the Review and Editing W orkshops to discuss and r efine
the first draft of the textbook. W e also expr ess our gratitude to Pr of. Krishna Kumar ,
Director, NCER T, for entrusting us with the task of pr esenting this textbook as a part of
the national effort for improving science education. I also thank Prof. G. Ravindra, Joint
Director, NCER T, for his help fr om time-to-time. Pr
of. Hukum Singh, Head, Department
of Education in Science and Mathematics, NCER T, was always willing to help us in our
endeavour in every possible way.
We welcome suggestions and comments fr om our valued users, especially students
and teachers. W e wish our young r eaders a happy jour ney into the exciting r ealm of
physics.
A. W. JOSHI
Chief Advisor
Textbook Development Committee
x

TEXTBOOK DEVELOPMENT C OMMITTEE
CHAIRPERSON , ADVISORY COMMITTEE FOR TEXTBOOKS IN SCIENCE AND MATHEMATICS
J.V. Narlikar , Emeritus Pr ofessor , Inter -University Centr e for Astr onomy and Astr ophysics
(IUCAA), Ganesh khind, Pune University Campus , Pune
CHIEF ADVISOR
A.W. Joshi, Honorary V isiting Scientist, National Centre for Radio Astr ophysics (NCRA), Pune
University Campus, Pune (Formerly Professor at Department of Physics, University of Pune)
MEMBERS
A.K. Ghatak, Emeritus Pr ofessor , Department of Physics, Indian Institute of T echnology,
New Delhi
Alika Khar e, Professor , Department of Physics, Indian Institute of T echnology, Guwahati
Anjali Kshirsagar , Reader , Department of Physics, University of Pune, Pune
Anuradha Mathur , PGT , Moder n School, V asant V ihar, New Delhi
Atul Mody, Lecturer (S.G.), VES College of Arts, Science and Commerce, Mumbai
B.K. Shar ma, Pr ofessor , DESM, NCER T, New Delhi
Chitra Goel, PGT , Rajkiya Pratibha V ikas V idyalaya, Tyagraj Nagar , New Delhi
Gagan Gupta, Reader , DESM, NCER T, New Delhi
H.C. Pradhan, Professor , Homi Bhabha Centre of Science Education ( TIFR), Mumbai
N. Panchapakesan, Professor (Retd. ), Department of Physics and Astrophysics, University of
Delhi, Delhi
R. Joshi, Lectur er (S.G.), DESM, NCER T, New Delhi
S.K. Dash, Reader , DESM, NCER T, New Delhi
S. Rai Choudhary, Professor , Department of Physics and Astr ophysics, University of Delhi, Delhi
S.K. Upadhyay, PGT, Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalaya, Muzaffar Nagar
S.N. Prabhakara, PGT, DM School, Regional Institute of Education (NCERT), Mysore
V.H. Raybagkar , Reader , Nowrosjee W adia College, Pune
Vishwajeet Kulkarni, Teacher (Grade I ), Higher Secondary Section, Smt. Parvatibai Chowgule
College, Margao, Goa
MEMBER -COORDINATOR
V.P. Srivastava, Reader , DESM, NCER T, New Delhi

THE CONSTITUTION OF
INDIA
PREAMBLE
PEOPLE OF INDIA, having
solemnly resolved to constitute India into a
1[SOVEREIGN SOCIALIST SECULAR '
DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC) and to secure
to all its citizens :
JUSTICE, social, economic and
political;
LIBERTY of thought, expression, belief,
faith and worship;
EQUALITY of status and of opportunity;
and to promote among them all
FRATERNITY assuring the dignity of
the individual and the 2[unity and
integrity of the Nation];
IN OUR CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY
this twenty-sixth day of November, 1949 do
HEREBY ADOPT, ENACT AND GIVE TO
OURSELVES THIS CONSTITUTION.
1.Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, Sec.2,
for "Sovereign Democratic Republic" (w.e.f. 3.1.1977)
2.Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, Sec.2,
for "Unity of the Nation" (w.e.f. 3.1.1977)

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The National Council of Educational Resear ch and T raining acknowledges the valuable
contribution of the individuals and organisations involved in the development of Physics Textbook
for Class XII. The Council also acknowledges the valuable contribution of the following academics
for reviewing and refining the manuscripts of this book:
Anu V enugopalan, Lectur er, School of Basic and Applied Sciences, GGSIP University, Delhi; A.K.
Das, PGT, St. Xavier’s Senior Secondary School, Delhi; Bharati Kukkal, PGT, Kendriya Vidyalaya,
Pushp V ihar, New Delhi; D.A. Desai, Lectur er (Retd.) , Rupar el College, Mumbai; Devendra Kumar ,
PGT, Rajkiya Pratibha V ikas V idyalaya, Y amuna V ihar, Delhi; I.K. Gogia, PGT, Kendriya V idyalaya,
Gole Market, New Delhi; K.C. Shar ma, Reader , Regional Institute of Education (NCER T), Ajmer;
M.K. Nandy, Associate Pr
ofessor , Department of Physics, Indian Institute of T echnology, Guwahati;
M.N. Bapat, Reader , Regional Institute of Education (NCER T), Mysor e; R. Bhattacharjee, Asstt.
Professor , Department of Electr onics and Communication Engineering, Indian Institute of T echnology,
Guwahati; R.S. Das, Vice-Principal (Retd.) , Balwant Ray Mehta Senior Secondary School, Lajpat
Nagar , New Delhi; Sangeeta D. Gadr e, Reader , Kirori Mal College, Delhi; Sur
esh Kumar , PGT, Delhi
Public School, Dwarka, New Delhi; Sushma Jair eth, Reader , Department of W omen’s Studies, NCER T,
New Delhi; Shyama Rath, Reader , Department of Physics and Astr ophysics, University of Delhi,
Delhi; Y ashu Kumar , PGT, Kulachi Hans Raj Model School, Ashok V ihar, Delhi.
The Council also gratefully acknowledges the valuable contribution of the following academics
for the editing and finalisation of this book: B.B. T ripathi, Professor (Retd.) , Department of Physics,
Indian Institute of T echnology, New Delhi; Dipan K. Ghosh, Professor , Department of Physics,
Indian Institute of Technology, Mumbai; Dipanjan Mitra, Scientist , National Centre for Radio
Astrophysics (TIFR), Pune; G.K. Mehta, Raja Ramanna Fellow, Inter -University Accelerator Centr e,
New Delhi; G.S. V isweswaran, Professor , Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of
Technology, New Delhi; H.C. Kandpal, Head , Optical Radiation Standards, National Physical
Laboratory, New Delhi; H.S. Mani, Raja Ramanna Fellow , Institute of Mathematical Sciences,
Chennai; K. Thyagarajan, Professor , Department of Physics, Indian Institute of T echnology, New
Delhi; P .C. V inod Kumar , Professor , Department of Physics, Sar dar Patel University, V allabh
Vidyanagar , Gujarat; S. Annapoor ni, Professor , Department of Physics and Astr ophysics, University
of Delhi, Delhi; S.C. Dutta Roy, Emeritus Pr ofessor , Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian
Institute of T echnology, New Delhi; S.D. Joglekar , Professor , Department of Physics, Indian Institute
of Technology, Kanpur; V . Sundara Raja, Professor , Sri V enkateswara University, T irupati.
The Council also acknowledges the valuable contributions of the following academics for
refining the text in 2017: A.K. Srivastava, Assistant Pr ofessor , DESM, NCER T, New Delhi; Ar nab
Sen, Assistant Pr ofessor , NERIE, Shillong; L.S. Chauhan, Assistant Pr ofessor , RIE, Bhopal;
O.N. Awasthi, Pr ofessor (Retd. ), RIE, Bhopal; Rachna Garg, Professor , DESM, NCER T, New
Delhi; Raman Namboodiri, Assistant Pr ofessor , RIE, Mysuru; R.R. Koir eng, Assistant Pr ofessor ,
DCS, NCER T, New Delhi; Shashi Prabha, Professor , DESM, NCER T, New Delhi; and S.V . Shar ma,
Professor , RIE, Ajmer .
Special thanks ar e due to Hukum Singh, Professor and Head, DESM, NCER T for his support.
The Council also acknowledges the support provided by the APC office and the administrative
staff of the DESM; Deepak Kapoor , Inchar ge, Computer Station; Inder Kumar , DTP Operator;
Mohd. Qamar T abrez and Hari Darshan Lodhi Copy Edito r; Rishi Pal Singh, Sr . Proof Reader ,
NCER T and Ashima Srivastava, Pr oof Reader in shaping this book.
The contributions of the Publication Department in bringing out this book are also duly
acknowledged.

Contents of Physics Part I
Class XII
CHAPTER ONE
E
LECTRIC CHARGES AND FIELDS 1
CHAPTER TWO
ELECTROSTATIC POTENTIAL AND CAPACITANCE 45
CHAPTER THREE
CURRENT ELECTRICITY 81
CHAPTER FOUR
MOVING CHARGES AND MAGNETISM 107
CHAPTER FIVE
MAGNETISM AND MATTER 136
CHAPTER SIX
ELECTROMAGNETIC INDUCTION 154
CHAPTER SEVEN
ALTERNATING CURRENT 177
CHAPTER EIGHT
ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES 201
ANSWERS 217

CONTENTS
FOREWORD v
RATIONALISATION OF CONTENT IN THE TEXTBOOK vii
PREFACE ix
CHAPTER NINE
RA
Y OPTICS AND OPTICAL INSTRUMENTS
9.1 Introduction 221
9.2 Reflection of Light by Spherical Mirrors 222
9.3 Refraction 228
9.4 Total Internal Reflection 229
9.5 Refraction at Spherical Surfaces and by Lenses 232
9.6 Refraction through a Prism 239
9.7 Optical Instruments 240
CHAPTER TEN
WAVE OPTICS
10.1 Introduction 255
10.2 Huygens Principle 257
10.3 Refraction and Reflection of Plane W aves using Huygens Principle 258
10.4 Coher ent and Incoher ent Addition of W aves 262
10.5 Interference of Light W aves and Y oung’s Experiment 265
10.6 Diffraction 266
10.7 Polarisation 269
CHAPTER ELEVEN
DUAL NATURE OF RADIATION AND MATTER
11.1 Introduction 274
11.2 Electron Emission 275

11.3 Photoelectric Effect 276
11.4 Experimental Study of Photoelectric Effect 277
11.5 Photoelectric Ef fect and W ave Theory of Light 280
11.6 Einstein’s Photoelectric Equation: Energy Quantum of Radiation 281
11.7 Particle Nature of Light: The Photon 283
11.8 Wave Natur e of Matter 284
CHAPTER TWEL VE
ATOMS
12.1 Introduction 290
12.2 Alpha-particle Scattering and Rutherford’s Nuclear Model of Atom 291
12.3 Atomic Spectra 296
12.4 Bohr Model of the Hydrogen Atom 297
12.5 The Line Spectra of the Hydrogen Atom 300
12.6 DE Broglie’s Explanation of Bohr’s Second Postulate of Quantisation 301
CHAPTER THIRTEEN
NUCLEI
13.1 Introduction 306
13.2 Atomic Masses and Composition of Nucleus 306
13.3 Size of the Nucleus 309
13.4 Mass-Energy and Nuclear Binding Energy 310
13.5 Nuclear Force 313
13.6 Radioactivity 314
13.7 Nuclear Energy 314
CHAPTER FOURTEEN
SEMICONDUCTOR ELECTRONICS : MATERIALS , DEVICES AND SIMPLE CIRCUITS
14.1 Introduction 323
14.2 Classification of Metals, Conductors and Semiconductors 324
14.3 Intrinsic Semiconductor 327
14.4 Extrinsic Semiconductor 329
xvi

xvii14.5 p-n Junction 333
14.6 Semiconductor Diode 334
14.7 Application of Junction Diode as a Rectifier 338
APPENDICES 344
ANSWERS 346
BIBLIOGRAPHY 353

BACK COVER
(Adapted fr om http://www.iter .or
g and
http://www.dae.gov.in)
Cut away view of International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor (ITER)
device. The man in the bottom shows the scale.
ITER is a joint international research and development project that
aims to demonstrate the scientific and technical feasibility of fusion power .
India is one of the seven full partners in the project, the others being
the European Union (represented by EURATOM), Japan, the People’s
Republic of China, the Republic of Korea, the Russian Federation and the
USA. ITER will be constructed in Europe, at Cadarache in the South of
France and will pr ovide 500 MW of fusion power .
Fusion is the energy source of the sun and the stars. On earth, fusion
research is aimed at demonstrating that this energy source can be used to
produce electricity in a safe and environmentally benign way, with
abundant fuel resources, to meet the needs of a growing world population.
For details of India’s r ole, see Nuclear India , Vol. 39, No. 11-12/
May-June 2006, issue available at Department of Atomic Energy (DAE)
website mentioned above.COVER DESIGN
(Adapted from http://nobelprize.org and
the Nobel Prize in Physics 2006)
Different stages in the evolution of
the universe.