Physics
29012.1 I NTRODUCTION
By the nineteenth century, enough evidence had accumulated in favour of
atomic hypothesis of matter . In 1897, the experiments on electric dischar ge
through gases carried out by the English physicist J . J. Thomson (1856 вҖ“
1940) revealed that atoms of different elements contain negatively charged
constituents (electr ons) that ar e identical for all atoms. However , atoms on a
whole are electrically neutral. Therefore, an atom must also contain some
positive charge to neutralise the negative charge of the electrons. But what
is the arrangement of the positive charge and the electrons inside the atom?
In other words, what is the structure of an atom?
The first model of atom was proposed by J. J. Thomson in 1898.
According to this model, the positive charge of the atom is uniformly
distributed throughout the volume of the atom and the negatively charged
electrons are embedded in it like seeds in a watermelon. This model was
picturesquely called plum pudding model of the atom. However
subsequent studies on atoms, as described in this chapter , showed that
the distribution of the electrons and positive charges are very different
from that proposed in this model.
We know that condensed matter (solids and liquids) and dense gases at
all temperatures emit electromagnetic radiation in which a continuous
distribution of several wavelengths is present, though with different
intensities. This radiation is considered to be due to oscillations of atomsChapter Twelve
ATOMS
Reprint 2026-27

291Atoms
and molecules, governed by the interaction of each atom or
molecule with its neighbours. In contrast , light emitted from
rarefied gases heated in a flame, or excited electrically in a
glow tube such as the familiar neon sign or mercury vapour
light has only certain discrete wavelengths. The spectrum
appears as a series of bright lines. In such gases, the
average spacing between atoms is large. Hence, the
radiation emitted can be considered due to individual atoms
rather than because of interactions between atoms or
molecules.
In the early nineteenth century it was also established
that each element is associated with a characteristic
spectrum of radiation, for example, hydrogen always gives
a set of lines with fixed relative position between the lines.
This fact suggested an intimate relationship between the
internal structure of an atom and the spectrum of
radiation emitted by it. In 1885, Johann Jakob Balmer
(1825 вҖ“ 1898) obtained a simple empirical formula which
gave the wavelengths of a group of lines emitted by atomic
hydrogen. Since hydrogen is simplest of the elements
known, we shall consider its spectrum in detail in this
chapter .
Ernst Rutherford (1871вҖ“1937), a former research
student of J. J. Thomson, was engaged in experiments on
Оұ-particles emitted by some radioactive elements. In 1906,
he proposed a classic experiment of scattering of these
Оұ-particles by atoms to investigate the atomic structure.
This experiment was later performed around 1911 by Hans
Geiger (1882вҖ“1945) and Ernst Marsden (1889вҖ“1970, who
was 20 year -old student and had not yet ear ned his
bachelorвҖҷs degree). The details are discussed in Section
12.2. The explanation of the results led to the birth of
RutherfordвҖҷs planetary model of atom (also called the
nuclear model of the ato m). According to this the entire
positive charge and most of the mass of the atom is
concentrated in a small volume called the nucleus with electrons revolving
around the nucleus just as planets revolve around the sun.
RutherfordвҖҷs nuclear model was a major step towards how we see
the atom today. However , it could not explain why atoms emit light of
only discrete wavelengths. How could an atom as simple as hydrogen,
consisting of a single electron and a single proton, emit a complex
spectrum of specific wavelengths? In the classical picture of an atom, the
electron revolves round the nucleus much like the way a planet revolves
round the sun. However , we shall see that ther e are some serious
difficulties in accepting such a model.
12.212.212.212.212.2 AAA
AALPHA LPHALPHALPHALPHA- -- --P PP PPAR ARARARARTICLE TICLETICLETICLETICLE S S S S SCA CACA CACATTERING TTERINGTTERING TTERINGTTERING AND ANDAND ANDAND
R RR
RRUTHERFORDUTHERFORDUTHERFORDUTHERFORDUTHERFORD вҖҷ вҖҷвҖҷ вҖҷвҖҷS SS SS N N N N NUCLEARUCLEARUCLEARUCLEARUCLEAR M MM MMODELODELODELODELODEL OF OFOF OFOF A AA AATOM TOMTOMTOMTOM
At the suggestion of Ernst Rutherford, in 1911, H. Geiger and E. Marsden
performed some experiments. In one of their experiments, as shown inErnst Rutherford (1871 вҖ“Ernst Rutherford (1871 вҖ“Ernst Rutherford (1871 вҖ“Ernst Rutherford (1871 вҖ“Ernst Rutherford (1871 вҖ“
1937) 1937) 1937) 1937) 1937) New Zealand born,
British physicist who did
pioneering work on
radioactive radiation. He
discovered alpha-rays and
beta-rays. Along with
Federick Soddy, he created
the modern theory of
radioactivity. He studied
the вҖҳemanationвҖҷ of thorium
and discovered a new noble
gas, an isotope of radon,
now known as thoron. By
scattering alpha-rays from
the metal foils, he
discovered the atomic
nucleus and proposed the
planetary model of the
atom. He also estimated the
approximate size of the
nucleus.ERNST RUTHERFORD (1871 вҖ“ 1937)
Reprint 2026-27

Physics
292Fig. 12.1, they directed a beam of
5.5 MeV a-particles emitted from a
83Bi radioactive source at a thin metal
foil made of gold. Figure 12.2 shows a
schematic diagram of this experiment.
Alpha-particles emitted by a 214
83Bi
radioactive source were collimated into
a narrow beam by their passage
through lead bricks. The beam was
allowed to fall on a thin foil of gold of
thickness 2.1 Г— 10вҖ“7 m. The scattered
alpha-particles were observed through
a rotatable detector consisting of zinc
sulphide screen and a microscope. The
scattered alpha-particles on striking
the screen produced brief light flashes
or scintillations. These flashes may be
viewed through a microscope and the
distribution of the number of scattered
particles may be studied as a function
of angle of scattering.
FIGURE 12.2 Schematic arrangement of the Geiger -Marsden experiment.
A typical graph of the total number of a-particles scattered at different
angles, in a given interval of time, is shown in Fig. 12.3. The dots in this
figure represent the data points and the solid curve is the theoretical
prediction based on the assumption that the target atom has a small,
dense, positively charged nucleus. Many of the a-particles pass through
the foil. It means that they do not suffer any collisions. Only about 0.14%
of the incident a-particles scatter by more than 1В°; and about 1 in 8000
deflect by more than 90В°. Rutherford argued that, to deflect the a-particle
backwards, it must experience a large repulsive force. This force couldFIGURE 12.1 Geiger -Marsden scattering experiment.
The entire apparatus is placed in a vacuum chamber
(not shown in this figure).
Reprint 2026-27

293Atoms
be provided if the greater part of the
mass of the atom and its positive charge
were concentrated tightly at its centre.
Then the incoming Оұ-particle could get
very close to the positive charge without
penetrating it, and such a close
encounter would result in a large
deflection. This agreement supported
the hypothesis of the nuclear atom. This
is why Rutherford is credited with the
discovery of the nucleus.
In RutherfordвҖҷs nuclear model of
the atom, the entire positive charge and
most of the mass of the atom are
concentrated in the nucleus with the
electrons some distance away. The
electrons would be moving in orbits
about the nucleus just as the planets
do around the sun. RutherfordвҖҷs
experiments suggested the size of
the nucleus to be about 10вҖ“15 m to
10вҖ“14 m. From kinetic theory, the size
of an atom was known to be 10вҖ“10 m,
about 10,000 to 100,000 times larger
than the size of the nucleus. Thus, the electrons would seem to be at a
distance from the nucleus of about 10,000 to 100,000 times the size of
the nucleus itself. Thus, most of an atom is empty space. With the atom
being largely empty space, it is easy to see why most Оұ-particles go right
through a thin metal foil. However , when Оұ-particle happens to come
near a nucleus, the intense electric field there scatters it through a large
angle. The atomic electrons, being so light, do not appreciably affect the
Оұ-particles.
The scattering data shown in Fig. 12.3 can be analysed by employing
RutherfordвҖҷs nuclear model of the atom. As the gold foil is very thin, it
can be assumed that Оұ-particles will suffer not more than one scattering
during their passage through it. Therefore, computation of the trajectory
of an alpha-particle scattered by a single nucleus is enough. Alpha-
particles are nuclei of helium atoms and, therefore, carry two units, 2 e,
of positive charge and have the mass of the helium atom. The charge of
the gold nucleus is Z e, where Z is the atomic number of the atom; for
gold Z = 79. Since the nucleus of gold is about 50 times heavier than an
Оұ-particle, it is reasonable to assume that it remains stationary
throughout the scattering process. Under these assumptions, the
trajectory of an alpha-particle can be computed employing NewtonвҖҷs
second law of motion and the CoulombвҖҷs law for electrostatic
force of repulsion between the alpha-particle and the positively
charged nucleus.FIGUREFIGUREFIGUREFIGUREFIGURE 12.3 12.3 12.3
12.3 12.3 Experimental data points (shown by
dots) on scattering of Оұ-particles by a thin foil at
different angles obtained by Geiger and Marsden
using the setup shown in Figs. 12.1 and
12.2. RutherfordвҖҷs nuclear model predicts the solid
curve which is seen to be in good agreement with
experiment.
Reprint 2026-27

Physics
EXAMPLE 12.1The magnitude of this force is
0(2 )( )1
4e ZeFrОө=ПҖ(12.1)
where r is the distance between the a-particle and the nucleus. The force
is directed along the line joining the a-particle and the nucleus. The
magnitude and direction of the force on an a-particle continuously
changes as it approaches the nucleus and recedes away from it.
12.2.1 Alpha-particle trajectory
The trajectory traced by an a-particle depends on the impact parameter,
b of collision. The impact parameter is the perpendicular distance of the
initial velocity vector of the a-particle from the centre of the nucleus (Fig.
12.4). A given beam of a-particles has a
distribution of impact parameters b, so that
the beam is scattered in various directions
with different probabilities (Fig. 12.4). (In
a beam, all particles have nearly same
kinetic energy.) It is seen that an a-particle
close to the nucleus (small impact
parameter) suffers large scattering. In case
of head-on collision, the impact parameter
is minimum and the a-particle rebounds
back ( q @ p). For a lar ge impact parameter ,
the a-particle goes nearly undeviated and
has a small deflection ( q @ 0).
The fact that only a small fraction of the
number of incident particles rebound back
indicates that the number of a-particles
undergoing head on collision is small. This,
in turn, implies that the mass and positive charge of the atom is
concentrated in a small volume. Rutherford scattering therefore, is a
powerful way to determine an upper limit to the size of the nucleus.FIGURE 12.4 Trajectory of a-particles in the
coulomb field of a target nucleus. The impact
parameter , b and scattering angle q
are also depicted.
Example 12.1 In the RutherfordвҖҷs nuclear model of the atom, the
nucleus (radius about 10вҖ“15 m) is analogous to the sun about which
the electron move in orbit (radius В» 10вҖ“10 m) like the earth orbits
around the sun. If the dimensions of the solar system had the same
proportions as those of the atom, would the earth be closer to or
farther away from the sun than actually it i s? The radius of earthвҖҷs
orbit is about 1.5 Вҙ 1011 m. The radius of sun is taken as 7 Вҙ 108 m.
Solution The ratio of the radius of electronвҖҷs orbit to the radius of
nucleus is (10вҖ“10 m)/(10вҖ“15 m) = 105, that is, the radius of the electronвҖҷs
orbit is 105 times larger than the radius of nucleus. If the radius of
the earthвҖҷs orbit around the sun were 105 times larger than the radius
of the sun, the radius of the earthвҖҷs orbit would be 105 Вҙ 7 Вҙ 108 m =
7 Вҙ 1013 m. This is more than 100 times greater than the actual
orbital radius of earth. Thus, the earth would be much farther away
from the sun.
It implies that an atom contains a much greater fraction of empty
space than our solar system does.
Reprint 2026-27

295Atoms EXAMPLE 12.2Example 12.2 In a Geiger-Marsden experiment, what is the distance
of closest approach to the nucleus of a 7.7 MeV a-particle before it
comes momentarily to rest and reverses its direction?
Solution The key idea here is that throughout the scattering process,
the total mechanical energy of the system consisting of an a-particle
and a gold nucleus is conserved. The systemвҖҷs initial mechanical
energy is Ei, before the particle and nucleus interact, and it is equal
to its mechanical energy Ef when the a-particle momentarily stops.
The initial energy Ei is just the kinetic energy K of the incoming
a- particle. The final energy Ef is just the electric potential energy U
of the system. The potential energy U can be calculated from
Eq. (12.1).
Let d be the centre-to-centre distance between the a-particle and
the gold nucleus when the a-particle is at its stopping point. Then
we can write the conservation of energy Ei = Ef as
0 01 (2 )( ) 2
4 4e Ze ZeKd dОө Оө= =ПҖ ПҖ
Thus the distance of closest approach d is given by
4ZedKОө=ПҖ
The maximum kinetic energy found in a-particles of natural origin is
7.7 MeV or 1.2 Г— 10вҖ“12 J. Since 1/4 pe0 = 9.0 Г— 109 N m2/C2. Therefore
with e = 1.6 Г— 10вҖ“19 C, we have,
9 2 2 вҖ“19 2
12(2)(9.0 10 Nm / )(1.6 10 ) Z
1.2 10 JC CdвҲ’Г— Г—=
Г—
= 3.84 Г— 10вҖ“16 Z m
The atomic number of foil material gold is Z = 79, so that
d (Au) = 3.0 Г— 10вҖ“14 m = 30 fm. (1 fm (i.e. fermi) = 10вҖ“15 m.)
The radius of gold nucleus is, therefore, less than 3.0 Г— 10вҖ“14 m. This
is not in very good agreement with the observed result as the actual
radius of gold nucleus is 6 fm. The cause of discrepancy is that the
distance of closest approach is considerably larger than the sum of
the radii of the gold nucleus and the a-particle. Thus, the a-particle
reverses its motion without ever actually touching the gold nucleus.
12.2.2 Electron orbits
The Rutherford nuclear model of the atom which involves classical
concepts, pictures the atom as an electrically neutral sphere consisting
of a very small, massive and positively charged nucleus at the centre
surrounded by the revolving electrons in their respective dynamically
stable orbits. The electrostatic force of attraction, Fe between the revolving
electrons and the nucleus provides the requisite centripetal force ( Fc) to
keep them in their orbits. Thus, for a dynamically stable orbit in a
hydrogen atom
Fe = Fc
2 2
4Оө=ПҖe mv
r r(12.2)
Reprint 2026-27

Physics
296Thus the relation between the orbit radius and the electron
velocity is
04ermvОө=ПҖ(12.3)
The kinetic energy ( K) and electrostatic potential energy ( U) of the electron
in hydrogen atom are
2 2
0 01 and 2 8 4e eK mv Ur r Оө Оө= = = вҲ’ПҖ ПҖ
(The negative sign in U signifies that the electrostatic force is in the вҖ“ r
direction.) Thus the total energy E of the electron in a hydrogen atom is
2 2
0 0 8 4e eE K Ur rОө Оө= + = вҲ’ПҖ ПҖ
08e
rОө= вҲ’ПҖ(12.4)
The total energy of the electron is negative. This implies the fact that
the electron is bound to the nucleus. If E were positive, an electron will
not follow a closed orbit around the nucleus.
12.3 ATOMIC SPECTRA
As mentioned in Section 12.1, each element has a characteristic spectrum
of radiation, which it emits. When an atomic gas or vapour is excited at
low pressure, usually by passing an electric current through it, the emitted
radiation has a spectrum which contains certain specific wavelengths
only. A spectrum of this kind is termed as emission line spectrum and it EXAMPLE 12.3Example 12.3 It is found experimentally that 13.6 eV energy is
required to separate a hydrogen atom into a proton and an electron.
Compute the orbital radius and the velocity of the electron in a
hydrogen atom.
Solution Total energy of the electron in hydrogen atom is вҖ“13.6 eV =
вҖ“13.6 Г— 1.6 Г— 10вҖ“19 J = вҖ“2.2 Г—10вҖ“18 J. Thus from Eq. (12.4), we have
02.2 10 J8ОөвҲ’= вҲ’ = вҲ’ Г—ПҖeEr
This gives the orbital radius
2 9 2 2 19 2
0(9 10 N m /C )(1.6 10 C) 8 (2)(вҖ“2.2 10 J)erEОөвҲ’
вҲ’Г— Г—= вҲ’ = вҲ’ПҖ Г—
= 5.3 Г— 10вҖ“11 m.
The velocity of the revolving electron can be computed from Eq. (12.3)
with m = 9.1 Г— 10вҖ“31 kg,
02.2 10 m/s.
4ev
mrОө= = Г—
ПҖ
Reprint 2026-27

297Atoms
consists of bright lines on a
dark background. The
spectrum emitted by atomic
hydrogen is shown in
Fig. 12.5. Study of emission
line spectra of a material can
therefore serve as a type of
вҖңfingerprintвҖқ for identification
of the gas. When white light
passes through a gas and we
analyse the transmitted light
using a spectrometer we find
some dark lines in the
spectrum. These dark lines
correspond precisely to those wavelengths which were found in the
emission line spectrum of the gas. This is called the absorption spectrum
of the material of the gas.
12.4 BOHR MODEL OF THE HYDROGEN
ATOM
The model of the atom proposed by Rutherford assumes
that the atom, consisting of a central nucleus and
revolving electron is stable much like sun-planet system
which the model imitates. However , ther e are some
fundamental differences between the two situations.
While the planetary system is held by gravitational
force, the nucleus-electron system being charged
objects, interact by CoulombвҖҷs Law of for ce. W e know
that an object which moves in a circle is being
constantly accelerated вҖ“ the acceleration being
centripetal in nature. According to classical
electromagnetic theory, an accelerating charged particle
emits radiation in the form of electromagnetic waves.
The energy of an accelerating electron should therefore,
continuously decrease. The electron would spiral
inward and eventually fall into the nucleus (Fig. 12. 6).
Thus, such an atom can not be stable. Further ,
according to the classical electromagnetic theory, the
frequency of the electromagnetic waves emitted by the
revolving electrons is equal to the frequency of
revolution. As the electrons spiral inwards, their angular
velocities and hence their frequencies would change
continuously, and so will the frequency of the light
emitted. Thus, they would emit a continuous spectrum,
in contradiction to the line spectrum actually observed.
Clearly Rutherford model tells only a part of the story
implying that the classical ideas are not sufficient to
explain the atomic structure.FIGURE 12.5 Emission lines in the spectrum of hydrogen.
Niels Henrik David Bohr
(1885 вҖ“ 1962) Danish
physicist who explained the
spectrum of hydrogen atom
based on quantum ideas.
He gave a theory of nuclear
fission based on the liquid-
drop model of nucleus.
Bohr contributed to the
clarification of conceptual
problems in quantum
mechanics, in particular by
proposing the comple-
mentary principle.NIELS HENRIK DA VID BOHR (1885 вҖ“ 1962)
Reprint 2026-27

Physics
EXAMPLE 12.4FIGURE 12.6 An accelerated atomic electron must spiral into the
nucleus as it loses energy.
Example 12.4 According to the classical electromagnetic theory,
calculate the initial frequency of the light emitted by the electron
revolving around a proton in hydrogen atom.
Solution From Example 12.3 we know that velocity of electron moving
around a proton in hydrogen atom in an orbit of radius 5.3 Г— 10вҖ“11 m
is 2.2 Г— 10вҖ“6 m/s. Thus, the frequency of the electron moving around
the proton is
( )6 1
112.2 10 m s
2 2 5.3 10 mv
rОҪвҲ’
вҲ’Г—= =ПҖПҖ Г—
В» 6.6 Г— 1015 Hz.
According to the classical electromagnetic theory we know that the
frequency of the electromagnetic waves emitted by the revolving
electrons is equal to the frequency of its revolution around the nucleus.
Thus the initial frequency of the light emitted is 6.6 Г— 1015 Hz.
It was Niels Bohr (1885 вҖ“ 1962) who made certain modifications in
this model by adding the ideas of the newly developing quantum
hypothesis. Niels Bohr studied in RutherfordвҖҷs laboratory for several
months in 1912 and he was convinced about the validity of Rutherford
nuclear model. Faced with the dilemma as discussed above, Bohr , in
1913, concluded that in spite of the success of electromagnetic theory in
explaining large-scale phenomena, it could not be applied to the processes
at the atomic scale. It became clear that a fairly radical departure from
the established principles of classical mechanics and electromagnetism
would be needed to understand the structure of atoms and the relation
of atomic structure to atomic spectra. Bohr combined classical and early
quantum concepts and gave his theory in the form of three postulates.
These are :
(i)BohrвҖҷs first postulate was that an electron in an atom could revolve
in certain stable orbits without the emission of radiant energy ,
contrary to the predictions of electromagnetic theory. According to
this postulate, each atom has certain definite stable states in which it
Reprint 2026-27

299Atoms
can exist, and each possible state has definite total energy. These are
called the stationary states of the atom.
(ii)BohrвҖҷs second postulate defines these stable orbits. This postulate
states that the electron revolves around the nucleus only in those
orbits for which the angular momentum is some integral multiple of
h/2ПҖ where h is the PlanckвҖҷs constant (= 6.6 Г— 10вҖ“34 J s). Thus the
angular momentum ( L) of the orbiting electron is quantised. That is
L = nh/2ПҖ (12.5)
(iii)BohrвҖҷs third postulate incorporated into atomic theory the early
quantum concepts that had been developed by Planck and Einstein.
It states that an electron might make a transition from one of its
specified non-radiating orbits to another of lower energy. When it
does so, a photon is emitted having energy equal to the energy
difference between the initial and final states . The frequency of the
emitted photon is then given by
hОҪ = Ei вҖ“ Ef(12.6)
where Ei and Ef are the energies of the initial and final states and Ei > Ef.
For a hydrogen atom, Eq. (12.4) gives the expression to determine
the energies of different energy states. But then this equation requires
the radius r of the electr on orbit. To calculate r , BohrвҖҷs second postulate
about the angular momentum of the electronвҖ“the quantisation
condition вҖ“ is used.
The radius of nth possible orbit thus found is
2 2
2Оө пЈ« пЈ¶ ПҖпЈ« пЈ¶=пЈ¬ пЈ·пЈ¬ пЈ·ПҖпЈӯ пЈёпЈӯ пЈёnn hrm e(12.7)
The total energy of the electron in the stationary states of the hydrogen
atom can be obtained by substituting the value of orbital radius in
Eq. (12.4) as
2 2 2
0 02
8 4Оө ОөпЈ« пЈ¶ пЈ« пЈ¶ПҖпЈ« пЈ¶пЈ« пЈ¶= вҲ’пЈ¬ пЈ· пЈ¬ пЈ· пЈ¬ пЈ·пЈ¬ пЈ·ПҖ ПҖпЈӯ пЈёпЈӯ пЈёпЈӯ пЈё пЈӯ пЈёne m eEh n
or 4
2 2 2
08nmeEn hОө= вҲ’ (12.8)
Substituting values, Eq. (12.8) yields
22.18 10JnEnвҲ’Г—= вҲ’ (12.9)
Atomic energies are often expressed in electron volts (e V) rather than
joules. Since 1 eV = 1.6 Г— 10вҖ“19 J, Eq. (12.9) can be rewritten as
213.6 eVnEn= вҲ’ (12.10)
The negative sign of the total energy of an electron moving in an orbit
means that the electron is bound with the nucleus. Energy will thus be
required to remove the electron from the hydrogen atom to a distance
infinitely far away from its nucleus (or proton in hydrogen atom).
Reprint 2026-27

Physics
30012.4.1 Energy levels
The energy of an atom is the least (largest negative value)
when its electron is revolving in an orbit closest to the
nucleus i.e., the one for which n = 1. For n = 2, 3, ... the
absolute value of the ener gy E is smaller , hence the ener gy
is progressively larger in the outer orbits. The lowest state
of the atom, called the ground state , is that of the lowest
energy, with the electron revolving in the orbit of smallest
radius, the Bohr radius, a0. The energy of this state ( n = 1),
E1 is вҖ“13.6 eV . Ther efore, the minimum ener gy requir ed to
free the electron from the ground state of the hydrogen atom
is 13.6 eV . It is called the ionisation ener gy of the hydr ogen
atom. This prediction of the BohrвҖҷs model is in excellent
agreement with the experimental value of ionisation energy .
At room temperature, most of the hydrogen atoms are
in ground state . When a hydrogen atom receives energy
by processes such as electron collisions, the atom may
acquire sufficient energy to raise the electron to higher
energy states. The atom is then said to be in an excited
state . From Eq. (12.1 0), for n = 2; the energy E2 is
вҖ“3.40 eV . It means that the ener gy requir ed to excite an
electron in hydrogen atom to its first excited state , is an
energy equal to E2 вҖ“ E1 = вҖ“3.40 eV вҖ“ (вҖ“13.6) eV = 10.2 eV .
Similarly, E3 = вҖ“1.51 eV and E3 вҖ“ E1 = 12.09 eV , or to excite
the hydrogen atom from its ground state ( n = 1) to second
excited state ( n = 3), 12.09 eV energy is required, and so
on. From these excited states the electron can then fall back
to a state of lower energy, emitting a photon in the process.
Thus, as the excitation of hydrogen atom increases (that is
as n increases) the value of minimum energy required to
free the electron from the excited atom decreases.
The energy level diagram * for the stationary states of a
hydrogen atom, computed from Eq. (12.10), is given in
Fig. 12.7. The principal quantum number n labels the stationary
states in the ascending order of energy. In this diagram, the highest
energy state corresponds to n =ВҘ in Eq, (12.10) and has an energy
of 0 eV . This is the ener gy of the atom when the electr on is
completely removed ( r = ВҘ) from the nucleus and is at rest. Observe how
the energies of the excited states come closer and closer together as
n increases.
12.5 T HE LINE SPECTRA OF THE HYDROGEN ATOM
According to the third postulate of BohrвҖҷs model, when an atom makes a
transition from the higher energy state with quantum number ni to the
lower energy state with quantum number nf (nf < ni), the difference of
energy is carried away by a photon of frequency nif such thatFIGURE 12.7 The energy level
diagram for the hydrogen atom.
The electron in a hydrogen atom
at room temperature spends
most of its time in the ground
state. To ionise a hydrogen
atom an electron from the
ground state, 13.6 eV of energy
must be supplied. (The horizontal
lines specify the presence of
allowed energy states.)
*An electron can have any total energy above E = 0 eV. In such situations the
electron is free. Thus there is a continuum of energy states above E = 0 eV, as
shown in Fig. 12.7.
Reprint 2026-27

301Atoms
hvif = Eni вҖ“ Enf(12.11)
Since both nf and ni are integers, this immediately shows that in
transitions between different atomic levels, light is radiated in various
discrete frequencies.
The various lines in the atomic spectra are produced when electrons
jump from higher energy state to a lower energy state and photons are
emitted. These spectral lines are called emission lines. But when an atom
absorbs a photon that has precisely the same energy needed by the
electron in a lower energy state to make transitions to a higher energy
state, the process is called absorption. Thus if photons with a continuous
range of frequencies pass through a rarefied gas and then are analysed
with a spectr ometer , a series of dark spectral absorption lines appear in
the continuous spectrum. The dark lines indicate the frequencies that
have been absorbed by the atoms of the gas.
The explanation of the hydrogen atom spectrum provided by BohrвҖҷs
model was a brilliant achievement, which greatly stimulated progress
towards the modern quantum theory. In 1922, Bohr was awarded Nobel
Prize in Physics.
12.6 DE BROGLIE вҖҷS EXPLANA TION OF BOHRвҖҷS
SECOND POSTULA TE OF QUANTISA TION
Of all the postulates, Bohr made in his model of the atom,
perhaps the most puzzling is his second postulate. It states
that the angular momentum of the electron orbiting around
the nucleus is quantised (that is, Ln = nh/2 p; n = 1, 2, 3 вҖҰ).
Why should the angular momentum have only those values
that are integral multiples of h/2p? The French physicist Louis
de Broglie explained this puzzle in 1923, ten years after Bohr
proposed his model.
We studied, in Chapter 11, about the de Br oglieвҖҷs
hypothesis that material particles, such as electrons, also
have a wave nature. C. J. Davisson and L. H. Germer later
experimentally verified the wave nature of electrons in 1927.
Louis de Broglie argued that the electron in its circular orbit,
as pr oposed by Bohr , must be seen as a particle wave. In
analogy to waves travelling on a string, particle waves too
can lead to standing waves under resonant conditions. From
Chapter 1 4 of Class XI Physics textbook, we know that when
a string is plucked, a vast number of wavelengths are excited.
However only those wavelengths survive which have nodes
at the ends and form the standing wave in the string. It means
that in a string, standing waves are formed when the total distance
travelled by a wave down the string and back is one wavelength, two
wavelengths, or any integral number of wavelengths. W aves with other
wavelengths interfere with themselves upon reflection and their
amplitudes quickly drop to zero. For an electron moving in nth circular
orbit of radius rn, the total distance is the circumference of the orbit,
2prn. ThusFIGURE 12.8 A standing wave
is shown on a circular orbit
where four de Broglie
wavelengths fit into the
circumference of the orbit.
Reprint 2026-27

Physics
3022p rn = nl, n = 1, 2, 3... (12.12)
Figure 12.8 illustrates a standing particle wave on a circular orbit
for n = 4, i.e., 2prn = 4l, where l is the de Broglie wavelength of the electron
moving in nth orbit. From Chapter 11, we have l = h/p , where p is the
magnitude of the electronвҖҷs momentum. If the speed of the electron is
much less than the speed of light, the momentum is mvn. Thus, l = h/
mvn. From Eq. (12.12), we have
2p rn = n h/mvn or m vn rn = nh/2 p
This is the quantum condition proposed by Bohr for the angular
momentum of the electron [Eq. (12.15)]. In Section 12.5, we saw that
this equation is the basis of explaining the discrete orbits and energy
levels in hydrogen atom. Thus de Broglie hypothesis provided an
explanation for BohrвҖҷs second postulate for the quantisation of angular
momentum of the orbiting electron. The quantised electron orbits and
energy states are due to the wave nature of the electron and only resonant
standing waves can persist.
BohrвҖҷs model, involving classical trajectory picture (planet-like electron
orbiting the nucleus), correctly predicts the gross features of the
hydrogenic atoms *, in particular , the fr equencies of the radiation emitted
or selectively absorbed. This model however has many limitations.
Some are:
(i)The Bohr model is applicable to hydrogenic atoms. It cannot be
extended even to mere two electron atoms such as helium. The analysis
of atoms with more than one electron was attempted on the lines of
BohrвҖҷs model for hydrogenic atoms but did not meet with any success.
Difficulty lies in the fact that each electron interacts not only with the
positively charged nucleus but also with all other electrons.
The formulation of Bohr model involves electrical force between
positively charged nucleus and electron. It does not include the
electrical forces between electrons which necessarily appear in
multi-electron atoms.
(ii)While the BohrвҖҷs model correctly predicts the frequencies of the light
emitted by hydrogenic atoms, the model is unable to explain the
relative intensities of the frequencies in the spectrum. In emission
spectrum of hydrogen, some of the visible frequencies have weak
intensity, others strong. Wh y? Experimental observations depict that
some transitions are more favoured than others. BohrвҖҷs model is
unable to account for the intensity variations.
BohrвҖҷs model presents an elegant picture of an atom and cannot be
generalised to complex atoms. For complex atoms we have to use a new
and radical theory based on Quantum Mechanics, which provides a more
complete picture of the atomic structure.
*Hydrogenic atoms are the atoms consisting of a nucleus with positive charge
+Ze and a single electr on, wher e Z is the pr oton number . Examples ar e hydr ogen
atom, singly ionised helium, doubly ionised lithium, and so forth. In these
atoms more complex electron-electron interactions are nonexistent.
Reprint 2026-27

303Atoms
SUMMARY
1.Atom, as a whole, is electrically neutral and therefore contains equal
amount of positive and negative charges.
2.In ThomsonвҖҷs model, an atom is a spherical cloud of positive charges
with electrons embedded in it.
3.In RutherfordвҖҷs model , most of the mass of the atom and all its positive
charge are concentrated in a tiny nucleus (typically one by ten thousand
the size of an atom), and the electrons revolve around it.
4.Rutherford nuclear model has two main difficulties in explaining the
structure of atom: (a) It predicts that atoms are unstable because the
accelerated electrons revolving around the nucleus must spiral into
the nucleus. This contradicts the stability of matter. (b) It cannot
explain the characteristic line spectra of atoms of different elements.
5.Atoms of most of the elements are stable and emit characteristic
spectrum. The spectrum consists of a set of isolated parallel lines
termed as line spectrum. It provides useful information about the
atomic structure.
6.To explain the line spectra emitted by atoms, as well as the stability
of atoms, NielвҖҷs Bohr proposed a model for hydrogenic (single elctron)
atoms. He introduced three postulates and laid the foundations of
quantum mechanics:
(a)In a hydrogen atom, an electron revolves in certain stable orbits
(called stationary orbits) without the emission of radiant energy.
(b)The stationary orbits are those for which the angular momentum
is some integral multiple of h/2p. (BohrвҖҷs quantisation condition.)
That is L = nh /2p, where n is an integer called the principal
quantum number.
(c)The third postulate states that an electron might make a transition
from one of its specified non-radiating orbits to another of lower
energy. When it does so, a photon is emitted having energy equal
to the energy difference between the initial and final states. The
frequency ( n) of the emitted photon is then given by
hn = Ei вҖ“ Ef
An atom absorbs radiation of the same frequency the atom emits,
in which case the electron is transferred to an orbit with a higher
value of n.
Ei + hn = Ef
7.As a result of the quantisation condition of angular momentum, the
electron orbits the nucleus at only specific radii. For a hydrogen atom
it is given by
rn
mh
en=пЈ«
пЈӯпЈ¬пЈ¶
пЈёпЈ·пЈ«
пЈӯпЈ¬пЈ¶
пЈёпЈ·2 2
ПҖПҖОө
The total energy is also quantised:
2 2 2
08nmeEn hОө= вҲ’
= вҖ“13.6 eV/ n2
The n = 1 state is called ground state. In hydrogen atom the ground
state energy is вҖ“13.6 eV. Higher values of n correspond to excited
states ( n > 1). Atoms are excited to these higher states by collisions
with other atoms or electrons or by absorption of a photon of right
frequency.
Reprint 2026-27

Physics
3048.de BroglieвҖҷs hypothesis that electrons have a wavelength О» = h/mv gave
an explanation for BohrвҖҷs quantised orbits by bringing in the wave-
particle duality. The orbits correspond to circular standing waves in
which the circumference of the orbit equals a whole number of
wavelengths.
9.BohrвҖҷs model is applicable only to hydrogenic (single electron) atoms.
It cannot be extended to even two electron atoms such as helium.
This model is also unable to explain for the relative intensities of the
frequencies emitted even by hydrogenic atoms.
POINTS TO PONDERPOINTS TO PONDERPOINTS TO PONDERPOINTS TO PONDERPOINTS TO PONDER
1.Both the ThomsonвҖҷs as well as the RutherfordвҖҷs models constitute an
unstable system. ThomsonвҖҷs model is unstable electrostatically, while
RutherfordвҖҷs model is unstable because of electromagnetic radiation
of orbiting electrons.
2.What made Bohr quantise angular momentum (second postulate) and
not some other quantity? Note, h has dimensions of angular
momentum, and for circular orbits, angular momentum is a very
relevant quantity. The second postulate is then so natural!
3.The orbital picture in BohrвҖҷs model of the hydrogen atom was
inconsistent with the uncertainty principle. It was replaced by modern
quantum mechanics in which BohrвҖҷs orbits are regions where the
electron may be found with large probability.
4.Unlike the situation in the solar system, where planet-planet
gravitational forces are very small as compared to the gravitational
force of the sun on each planet (because the mass of the sun is so
much greater than the mass of any of the planets), the electron-electron
electric force interaction is comparable in magnitude to the electron-
nucleus electrical force, because the charges and distances are of the
same order of magnitude. This is the reason why the BohrвҖҷs model
with its planet-like electron is not applicable to many electron atoms.
5.Bohr laid the foundation of the quantum theory by postulating specific
orbits in which electrons do not radiate. BohrвҖҷs model include only
one quantum number n. The new theory called quantum mechanics
supports BohrвҖҷs postulate. However in quantum mechanics (more
generally accepted), a given energy level may not correspond to just
one quantum state. For example, a state is characterised by four
quantum numbers ( n, l, m, and s), but for a pure Coulomb potential
(as in hydrogen atom) the energy depends only on n.
6.In Bohr model, contrary to ordinary classical expectation, the frequency
of revolution of an electron in its orbit is not connected to the frequency
of spectral line. The later is the difference between two orbital energies
divided by h. For transitions between large quantum numbers ( n to n
вҖ“ 1, n very lar ge), however , the two coincide as expected.
7.BohrвҖҷs semiclassical model based on some aspects of classical physics
and some aspects of modern physics also does not provide a true picture
of the simplest hydrogenic atoms. The true picture is quantum
mechanical affair which differs from Bohr model in a number of
fundamental ways. But then if the Bohr model is not strictly correct,
why do we bother about it? The reasons which make BohrвҖҷs model
still useful are:
Reprint 2026-27

305Atoms
(i)The model is based on just three postulates but accounts for almost
all the general features of the hydrogen spectrum.
(ii)The model incorporates many of the concepts we have learnt in
classical physics.
(iii)The model demonstrates how a theoretical physicist occasionally
must quite literally ignore certain problems of approach in hopes
of being able to make some predictions. If the predictions of the
theory or model agree with experiment, a theoretician then must
somehow hope to explain away or rationalise the problems that
were ignored along the way.
EXERCISES
12.1 Choose the correct alternative from the clues given at the end of
the each stat ement:
(a)The size of the atom in ThomsonвҖҷs model is .......... the atomic
size in RutherfordвҖҷs model. (much greater than/no different
from/much less than.)
(b)In the ground state of .......... electrons are in stable equilibrium,
while in .......... electrons always experience a net force.
(ThomsonвҖҷs model/ RutherfordвҖҷs model.)
(c)A classical atom based on .......... is doomed to collapse.
(ThomsonвҖҷs model/ RutherfordвҖҷs model.)
(d)An atom has a nearly continuous mass distribution in a ..........
but has a highly non-uniform mass distribution in ..........
(ThomsonвҖҷs model/ RutherfordвҖҷs model.)
(e)The positively charged part of the atom possesses most of the
mass in .......... (RutherfordвҖҷs model/both the models.)
12.2 Suppose you are given a chance to repeat the alpha-particle
scattering experiment using a thin sheet of solid hydrogen in place
of the gold foil. (Hydrogen is a solid at temperatures below 14 K.)
What results do you expect?
12.3 A difference of 2.3 eV separates two energy levels in an atom. What
is the frequency of radiation emitted when the atom make a
transition from the upper level to the lower level?
12.4 The gr ound state ener gy of hydr ogen atom is вҖ“13.6 eV . What ar e the
kinetic and potential energies of the electron in this state?
12.5 A hydrogen atom initially in the ground level absorbs a photon,
which excites it to the n = 4 level. Determine the wavelength and
frequency of photon.
12.6 (a) Using the BohrвҖҷs model calculate the speed of the electron in a
hydrogen atom in the n = 1, 2, and 3 levels. (b) Calculate the orbital
period in each of these levels.
12.7 The radius of the innermost electron orbit of a hydrogen atom is
5.3Г—10вҖ“11 m. What are the radii of the n = 2 and n =3 orbits?
12.8 A 12.5 eV electron beam is used to bombard gaseous hydrogen at
room temperature. What series of wavelengths will be emitted?
12.9 In accordance with the BohrвҖҷs model, find the quantum number
that characterises the earthвҖҷs revolution around the sun in an orbit
of radius 1.5 Г— 1011 m with orbital speed 3 Г— 104 m/s. (Mass of earth
= 6.0 Г— 1024 kg.)
Reprint 2026-27