University Physics Volume 3 SENIOR CONTRIBUTING AUTHORS SAMUEL J. LING, TRUMAN STATE UNIVERSITY JEFF SANNY, LOYOLA MARYMOUNT UNIVERSITY WILLIAM MOEBS, FORMERLY OF LOYOLA MARYMOUNT UNIVERSITY

OpenStax
Rice University
6100 Main Street MS -375
Houston, Texas 77005
To learn more about OpenStax, visit http s://openstax.org.
Individual print copies and bulk orders can be purchased through our website.
©2021 Rice University. Textbook content produced by OpenStax is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License (CC BY 4.0) . Under this license, any user of this textbook or the textbook
contents herein must provide proper attribution as follows:
-If you redistribute this textbook in a digital format (including but not limited to PDF and HTML), then you
must retain on every page the following attribution:
“Access for free at openstax.org.”
-If you redistribute this textbook in a print format, then you must include on every physical page the
following attribution:
“Access for free at openstax.org.”
-If you redistribute part of this textbook, then you must retain in every digital format page view (including
but not limited to PDF and HTML) and on every physical printed page the following attribution:
“Access for free at openstax.org.”
-If you use this textbook as a bibliographic reference, please include
https://openstax.org/details/books/university-p hysics-v olume-3 in your citation.
For questions regarding this licensing, please contact support @openstax.org.
Trademarks
The OpenStax name, OpenStax logo, OpenStax book covers, OpenStax CNX name, OpenStax CNX logo, OpenStax Tutor name, Openstax Tutor logo, Connexions name, Connexions logo, Rice University name, and
Rice University logo are not subject to the license and may not be reproduced without the prior and express
written consent of Rice University.
HARDCOVER BOOK ISBN -13 978-1-938168 -18-5
PAPERBACK BOOK ISBN -13 978-1-951693 -07-7
B&W PAPERBACK BOOK ISBN -13 978-1-50669 -825-0
DIGITAL VERSION ISBN -13 978-1-947172 -22-7
ENHANCED TEXTBOOK ISBN -13 978-1-947172 -33-3
ORIGINAL PUBLICATION YEAR 2016
3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 JAY 21 18 16

OPENSTAX OpenStax provides free, peer-reviewed, openly licensed textbooks for introductory college and Advanced Placement® courses and low-cost, personalized courseware that helps students learn. A nonprofit ed tech initiative based at Rice University, we’re committed to helping students access the tools they need to complete their courses and meet their educational goals. RICE UNIVERSITY OpenStax, OpenStax CNX, and OpenStax Tutor are initiatives of Rice University. As a leading research university with a distinctive commitment to undergraduate education, Rice University aspires to path-breaking research, unsurpassed teaching, and contributions to the betterment of our world. It seeks to fulfill this mission by cultivating a diverse community of learning and discovery that produces leaders across the spectrum of human endeavor. PHILANTHROPIC SUPPORT OpenStax is grateful for our generous philanthropic partners, who support our vision to improve educational opportunities for all learners. Arnold Ventures Chan Zuckerberg Initiative Chegg, Inc. Arthur and Carlyse Ciocca Charitable Foundation Digital Promise Ann and John Doerr Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation Girard Foundation Google Inc. The William and Flora Hewlett Foundation The Hewlett-Packard Company Intel Inc. Rusty and John Jaggers The Calvin K. Kazanjian Economics Foundation Charles Koch Foundation Leon Lowenstein Foundation, Inc. The Maxfield Foundation Burt and Deedee McMurtry Michelson 20MM Foundation National Science Foundation The Open Society Foundations Jumee Yhu and David E. Park III Brian D. Patterson USA-International Foundation The Bill and Stephanie Sick Fund Steven L. Smith & Diana T. Go Stand Together Robin and Sandy Stuart Foundation The Stuart Family Foundation Tammy and Guillermo Treviño Valhalla Charitable Foundation White Star Education Foundation

Study where you want, what
you want, when you want.
Access. The future of education.
openstax.org When you access your book in our web view, you can use our new online
highlighting and note-taking features to create your own study guides.
Our books are free and flexible, forever.
Get started at openstax.org/details/books/university-physics-volume-3

Cont ents
Prefac e 1
UNI T1OPT ICS
CHAP TER 1
The Na ture of Light 5
Intro duction 5
1.1The P ropagation o f Light 6
1.2The La w of Reflection 10
1.3Refraction 13
1.4Total Internal R eflection 17
1.5Disp ersion 22
1.6Huy gens’ s Principle 26
1.7Polariza tion 30
Chapter R eview 41
CHAP TER 2
Geometric Op tics and Imag e Forma tion 51
Intro duction 51
2.1Ima ges F orme d by Plane Mirrors 52
2.2Spheric al Mirrors 54
2.3Ima ges F orme d by Refraction 65
2.4Thin Lenses 68
2.5The Ey e 79
2.6The C amera 86
2.7The Simple Ma gnifier 88
2.8Microsc opes and T elesc opes 91
Chapter R eview 100
CHAP TER 3
Interference 113
Intro duction 113
3.1Young 's Double -Slit Inter ferenc e 113
3.2Mathema tics o f Inter ferenc e 117
3.3Multiple -Slit Inter ferenc e 120
3.4Inter ferenc e in Thin F ilms 122
3.5The Michelson Inter ferometer 127
Chapter R eview 132
CHAP TER 4
Diffraction 141
Intro duction 141
4.1Single -Slit Diffraction 142
4.2Intensity in Single -Slit Diffraction 146

4.3Double -Slit Diffraction 151
4.4Diffraction Gra tings 153
4.5Circular A pertures and R esolution 158
4.6X-Ray Diffraction 164
4.7Holograph y 166
Chapter R eview 169
UNI T2MODERN PHY SICS
CHAP TER 5
Relativity 179
Intro duction 179
5.1Invarianc e of Ph ysical La ws 180
5.2Relativity o f Simultaneity 182
5.3Time Dila tion 185
5.4Length C ontraction 194
5.5The Lorentz T rans forma tion 199
5.6Relativis tic V elocity T rans forma tion 209
5.7Doppler Eff ect f or Light 213
5.8Relativis tic Momentum 216
5.9Relativis tic Energ y 218
Chapter R eview 227
CHAP TER 6
Pho tons and Ma tter W aves 239
Intro duction 239
6.1Blackb ody Radia tion 240
6.2Photo electric Eff ect 248
6.3The C ompton Eff ect 254
6.4Bohr ’s Mo del o f the Hy drog en A tom 259
6.5De Broglie ’s Ma tter W aves 268
6.6Wave-Particle Duality 275
Chapter R eview 282
CHAP TER 7
Quantum Mechanics 295
Intro duction 295
7.1Wave Functions 296
7.2The Heisenb erg Unc ertainty P rinciple 307
7.3The Schrӧding er E qua tion 311
7.4The Quantum P article in a Bo x 314
7.5The Quantum Harmonic Oscilla tor 320
7.6The Quantum T unneling o f Particles through P otential Barriers 326
Chapter R eview 338
CHAP TER 8
Atomic S tructur e 347
Intro duction 347
8.1The Hy drog en A tom 348
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

8.2Orbital Ma gnetic Dip ole Moment o f the Electron 357
8.3Electron S pin 361
8.4The Ex clusion P rinciple and the P erio dic T able 366
8.5Atomic S pectra and X -rays 371
8.6Lasers 381
Chapter R eview 385
CHAP TER 9
Condensed Ma tter Ph ysics 393
Intro duction 393
9.1Types o f Molecular Bonds 394
9.2Molecular S pectra 399
9.3Bonding in C rystalline Solids 402
9.4Free Electron Mo del o f Metals 409
9.5Band Theor y of Solids 414
9.6Semic onductors and Doping 417
9.7Semic onductor Devic es 420
9.8Sup erconductivity 426
Chapter R eview 433
CHAP TER 10
Nuclear Ph ysics 441
Intro duction 441
10.1 Properties o f Nuclei 442
10.2 Nucle ar Binding Energ y 447
10.3 Radio activ e Dec ay 450
10.4 Nucle ar R eactions 456
10.5 Fission 464
10.6 Nucle ar F usion 470
10.7 Medical A pplic ations and Biologic al Eff ects o f Nucle ar Radia tion 475
Chapter R eview 484
CHAP TER 11
Particle Ph ysics and Cosmolog y 493
Intro duction 493
11.1 Intro duction to P article Ph ysics 494
11.2 Particle C onser vation La ws 499
11.3 Quarks 504
11.4 Particle A ccelera tors and Detectors 508
11.5 The Standard Mo del 516
11.6 The Big Bang 521
11.7 Evolution o f the Early Univ erse 525
Chapter R eview 533
Appendix AUnits 541
Appendix BConversion F actors 545
Appendix CFundamental Cons tants 549

Appendix DAstronomical Data 551
Appendix EMathematical F ormulas 553
Appendix FChemis try 557
Appendix GThe Gr eek Alphabet 559
Answer Key 560
Inde x 593
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

PREF ACE
Welcome to Univ ersity Ph ysics , an Op enStax
resourc e. This te xtbook w as writ ten to incre ase
student ac cess to high-quality le arning ma terials ,
maintaining highes t standards o f academic rig or a t
little to no c ost.
About OpenS tax
OpenStax is a nonpro fit b ased at Ric e Univ ersity ,
and it ’s our mis sion to impro ve student ac cess to
education . Our firs t op enly lic ense d colleg e textbook
was publishe d in 2012 and our librar y has sinc e
scaled to o ver 25 b ooks use d by hundre ds o f
thousands o f students acros s the glob e. Op enStax
Tutor , our lo w-cost personaliz ed learning to ol, is
being use d in c olleg e courses throughout the
countr y. The Op enStax mis sion is made p ossible
through the g enerous supp ort of philanthropic
founda tions . Through these p artnerships and with
the help o f additional lo w-cost resourc es from our
OpenStax p artners , Op enStax is bre aking do wn the
mos t common b arriers to le arning and emp owering
students and ins tructors to suc ceed.
About OpenS tax's r esour ces
Customiz ation
Univ ersity Ph ysics is lic ense d under a C reative
Commons A ttribution 4.0 Interna tional (C C BY)
license , which me ans tha t you c an dis tribute , remix ,
and build up on the c ontent , as long as y ou pro vide
attribution to Op enStax and its c ontent c ontributors .
Because our b ooks are op enly lic ense d, you are free
to use the entire b ook or pick and cho ose the
sections tha t are mos t relev ant to the nee ds o f your
course . Feel free to remix the c ontent b y as signing
your s tudents c ertain chapters and sections in y our
syllabus in the order tha t you pref er. You c an ev en
provide a direct link in y our s yllabus to the sections
in the w eb view o f your b ook.
Instructors also ha ve the option o f cre ating a
customiz ed version o f their Op enStax b ook. The
custom v ersion c an b e made a vailable to s tudents in
low-cost print or digital f orm through their c ampus
bookstore . Visit y our b ook p age on Op enStax .org f or
more inf orma tion .
Errata
All Op enStax te xtbooks underg o a rig orous review
process. Ho wever, like an y pro fessional-grade
textbook, errors sometimes o ccur. Sinc e our b ooksare w eb b ased, we can mak e up dates p erio dically
when deeme d pedagogic ally nec essary. If y ou ha ve a
correction to sugg est, submit it through the link on
your b ook p age on Op enStax .org. Subject ma tter
experts review all erra ta sugg estions . Op enStax is
commit ted to remaining transp arent a bout all
updates, so y ou will also find a lis t of past erra ta
chang es on y our b ook p age on Op enStax .org.
Format
You c an ac cess this te xtbook for free in w eb view or
PDF through Op enStax .org, and f or a lo w cost in
print .
About Univ ersity Phy sics
Univ ersity Ph ysics is designe d for the tw o- or three -
semes ter c alculus -based ph ysics c ourse . The te xt
has b een dev elop ed to meet the sc ope and se quenc e
of mos t univ ersity ph ysics c ourses and pro vides a
founda tion f or a c areer in ma thema tics, scienc e, or
engineering . The b ook pro vides an imp ortant
opp ortunity f or students to le arn the c ore c oncepts
of ph ysics and unders tand ho w those c oncepts apply
to their liv es and to the w orld around them .
Due to the c omprehensiv e na ture o f the ma terial , we
are o ffering the b ook in three v olumes f or fle xibility
and efficiency .
Coverage and scope
Our Univ ersity Ph ysics textbook adheres to the
scope and se quenc e of mos t two- and three -
semes ter ph ysics c ourses na tion wide . We ha ve
worked to mak e ph ysics interes ting and ac cessible
to students while maintaining the ma thema tical
rigor inherent in the subject . With this objectiv e in
mind , the c ontent o f this te xtbook has b een
develop ed and arrang ed to pro vide a logic al
progres sion from fundamental to more adv anced
concepts , building up on wha t students ha ve alre ady
learne d and emphasizing c onnections b etween
topics and b etween theor y and applic ations . The
goal of each section is to ena ble s tudents not jus t to
recogniz e concepts , but to w ork with them in w ays
that will b e useful in la ter c ourses and future
careers . The org aniza tion and p edagogic al features
were dev elop ed and v etted with f eedback from
scienc e educ ators de dicated to the project .
VOLUME I
Unit 1: MechanicsPreface 1

•Chapter 1: Units and Me asurement
•Chapter 2: V ectors
•Chapter 3: Motion A long a Straight Line
•Chapter 4: Motion in Tw o and Three Dimensions
•Chapter 5: N ewton ’s La ws of Motion
•Chapter 6: A pplic ations o f Newton ’s La ws
•Chapter 7: W ork and Kinetic Energ y
•Chapter 8: P otential Energ y and C onser vation o f
Energ y
•Chapter 9: Line ar Momentum and C ollisions
•Chapter 10: F ixed-Axis R otation
•Chapter 11: Angular Momentum
•Chapter 12: Sta tic E quilibrium and Elas ticity
•Chapter 13: Gra vitation
•Chapter 14: Fluid Mechanics
Unit 2: W aves and A coustics
•Chapter 15: Oscilla tions
•Chapter 16: W aves
•Chapter 17: Sound
VOLUME II
Unit 1: T hermo dynamics
•Chapter 1: T emp erature and He at
•Chapter 2: The Kinetic Theor y of Gases
•Chapter 3: The F irst Law of Thermo dynamics
•Chapter 4: The Sec ond La w of Thermo dynamics
Unit 2: Electricit y and Ma gnet ism
•Chapter 5: Electric Charg es and F ields
•Chapter 6: G auss’s La w
•Chapter 7: Electric P otential
•Chapter 8: C apacitanc e
•Chapter 9: Current and R esis tanc e
•Chapter 10: Direct -Current Circuits
•Chapter 11: Ma gnetic F orces and F ields
•Chapter 12: Sourc es o f Ma gnetic F ields
•Chapter 13: Electroma gnetic Induction
•Chapter 14: Inductanc e
•Chapter 15: A lterna ting-Current Circuits
•Chapter 16: Electroma gnetic W aves
VOLUME III
Unit 1: Opt ics
•Chapter 1: The N ature o f Light
•Chapter 2: Geometric Optics and Ima ge
Forma tion
•Chapter 3: Inter ferenc e
•Chapter 4: Diffraction
Unit 2: Mo dern Ph ysics
•Chapter 5: R elativity•Chapter 6: Photons and Ma tter W aves
•Chapter 7: Quantum Mechanics
•Chapter 8: A tomic Str ucture
•Chapter 9: C ondense d Ma tter Ph ysics
•Chapter 10: Nucle ar Ph ysics
•Chapter 11: P article Ph ysics and C osmolog y
Pedagogical f oundation
Throughout Univ ersity Ph ysics you will find
deriv ations o f concepts tha t present clas sical ide as
and techniques , as w ell as mo dern applic ations and
metho ds. Mos t chapters s tart with obser vations or
experiments tha t plac e the ma terial in a c onte xt of
physical experienc e. Presenta tions and e xplana tions
rely on y ears o f clas sroom e xperienc e on the p art of
long-time ph ysics pro fessors , striving f or a b alanc e
of clarity and rig or tha t has pro ven suc cessful with
their s tudents . Throughout the te xt, links ena ble
students to review e arlier ma terial and then return
to the present discus sion , reinf orcing c onnections
between topics . Key his toric al figures and
experiments are discus sed in the main te xt (ra ther
than in b oxes or sideb ars), maintaining a f ocus on
the dev elopment o f ph ysical intuition . Key ide as,
definitions , and e qua tions are highlighte d in the te xt
and lis ted in summar y form a t the end o f each
chapter . Examples and chapter -opening ima ges
often include c ontemp orar y applic ations from daily
life or mo dern scienc e and engineering tha t
students c an rela te to , from smar t phones to the
internet to GPS devic es.
Assessments that r einforce key concep ts
In-chapter Examples generally f ollow a three -part
forma t of Stra tegy, Solution , and Signific ance to
emphasiz e ho w to appro ach a problem , how to w ork
with the e qua tions , and ho w to check and g eneraliz e
the result . Examples are o ften f ollowed byCheck
Your Unders tanding ques tions and ans wers to help
reinf orce for students the imp ortant ide as o f the
examples .Problem-Solving Strategies in each
chapter bre ak do wn metho ds o f appro aching
various typ es o f problems into s teps s tudents c an
follow for guidanc e. The b ook also includes
exercises a t the end o f each chapter so s tudents c an
practic e wha t the y’ve learne d.
•Conc eptual ques tions do not re quire
calcula tion but tes t student le arning o f the k ey
concepts .
•Problems categoriz ed by section tes t student
problem-solving skills and the a bility to apply
ideas to practic al situa tions .
•Addit ional P roblems apply kno wledge acros s
the chapter , forcing s tudents to identif y wha t2 Preface
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

concepts and e qua tions are appropria te for
solving giv en problems . Randomly lo cated
throughout the problems are Unre asonable
Results exercises tha t ask s tudents to ev alua te
the ans wer to a problem and e xplain wh y it is
not re asona ble and wha t assumptions made
might not b e correct .
•Challeng e Problems extend te xt ide as to
interes ting but difficult situa tions .
Ans wers f or selecte d exercises are a vailable in an
Ans wer K eyat the end o f the b ook.
Additional r esour ces
Student and ins tructor resour ces
We’ve compile d additional resourc es for b oth
students and ins tructors , including Get ting Star ted
Guides , PowerPoint slides , and ans wer and solution
guides f or ins tructors and s tudents . Ins tructor
resourc es re quire a v erifie d ins tructor ac count ,
which y ou c an apply f or when y ou log in or cre ate
your ac count on Op enStax .org. Take adv anta ge of
these resourc es to supplement y our Op enStax b ook.
Communit y Hubs
OpenStax p artners with the Ins titute f or the Study o f
Knowledge Mana gement in E ducation (ISKME) to
offer C ommunity Hubs on OER C ommons – a
platform f or ins tructors to share c ommunity -cre ated
resourc es tha t supp ort Op enStax b ooks, free o f
charg e. Through our C ommunity Hubs , ins tructors
can uplo ad their o wn ma terials or do wnlo ad
resourc es to use in their o wn c ourses , including
additional ancillaries , teaching ma terial ,
multime dia, and relev ant c ourse c ontent . We
encoura ge ins tructors to join the hubs f or the
subjects mos t relev ant to y our te aching and
rese arch as an opp ortunity b oth to enrich y our
courses and to eng age with other faculty .
To re ach the C ommunity Hubs , visit
www.oercommons .org/hubs /OpenStax
(https:/ /www.oercommons .org/hubs /OpenStax) .
Partner r esour ces
OpenStax p artners are our allies in the mis sion to
mak e high-quality le arning ma terials a fforda ble and
accessible to s tudents and ins tructors ev erywhere .
Their to ols integra te se amles sly with our Op enStax
titles a t a lo w cost. To ac cess the p artner resourc es
for y our te xt, visit y our b ook p age on Op enStax .org.
About the author s
Senior contributing author s
Samuel J . Ling , Truman State Univ ersit yDr. Samuel Ling has ta ught intro ductor y and
advanced ph ysics f or o ver 25 y ears a t Truman Sta te
Univ ersity , where he is currently P rofessor o f
Physics and the Dep artment Chair . Dr. Ling has tw o
PhDs from Bos ton Univ ersity , one in Chemis try and
the other in Ph ysics , and he w as a R esearch F ellow at
the Indian Ins titute o f Scienc e, Bang alore , before
joining T ruman . Dr. Ling is also an a uthor o fA First
Course in V ibra tions and W aves, publishe d by
Oxford Univ ersity P ress. Dr. Ling has c onsidera ble
experienc e with rese arch in Ph ysics E duc ation and
has publishe d rese arch on c ollaborative learning
metho ds in ph ysics te aching . He w as a warde d a
Truman F ellow and a J epson f ellow in rec ognition o f
his inno vative teaching metho ds. Dr. Ling ’s rese arch
public ations ha ve sp anne d Cosmolog y, Solid Sta te
Physics , and N online ar Optics .
Jeff Sann y, Loyola Mar ymount Univ ersit y
Dr. Jeff Sann y earne d a BS in Ph ysics from Har vey
Mudd C olleg e in 1974 and a PhD in Solid Sta te
Physics from the Univ ersity o f California–Los
Ang eles in 1980. He joine d the faculty a t Loyola
Mar ymount Univ ersity in the fall o f 1980. During his
tenure , he has ser ved as dep artment Chair as w ell as
Associate De an. Dr. Sann y enjo ys teaching
intro ductor y ph ysics in p articular . He is also
passiona te about pro viding s tudents with rese arch
experienc e and has directe d an activ e
undergradua te student rese arch group in sp ace
physics f or man y years.
William Mo ebs, F ormerly of Lo yola Mar ymount
Univ ersit y
Dr. William Mo ebs e arne d a BS and PhD (1959 and
1965) from the Univ ersity o f Michig an. He then
joine d their s taff as a R esearch As sociate for one
year, where he c ontinue d his do ctoral rese arch in
particle ph ysics . In 1966, he ac cepte d an
app ointment to the Ph ysics Dep artment o f Indiana
Purdue F ort Wayne (IPFW ), where he ser ved as
Dep artment Chair from 1971 to 1979. In 1979, he
moved to Lo yola Mar ymount Univ ersity (LMU),
where he ser ved as Chair o f the Ph ysics Dep artment
from 1979 to 1986. He retire d from LMU in 2000. He
has publishe d rese arch in p article ph ysics , chemic al
kinetics , cell division , atomic ph ysics , and ph ysics
teaching .
Contributing author s
Stephen D . Druger, Northwestern Univ ersity
Alice Kolak owska, Univ ersity o f Memphis
David Anderson , Albion C olleg e
Daniel Bo wman , Ferrum C olleg e
Dedra Demaree , Georg etown Univ ersityPreface 3

Edw. S. Ginsb erg, Univ ersity o f Mas sachuset ts
Joseph T rout , Richard Sto ckton C olleg e
Kevin Wheelo ck, Bellevue C olleg e
David Smith , Univ ersity o f the V irgin Islands
Takashi Sa to, Kwantlen P olytechnic Univ ersity
Gerald F riedman , Santa F e Community C olleg e
Lev G asparov, Univ ersity o f North Florida
Lee LaR ue, Paris J unior C olleg e
Mark La ttery, Univ ersity o f Wisconsin
Richard L udlo w, Daniel W ebster C olleg e
Patrick Motl , Indiana Univ ersity K okomo
Tao P ang , Univ ersity o f Nevada, Las V egas
Kenneth P odolak , Pla ttsburgh Sta te Univ ersity
Reviewers
Salameh A hmad , Roches ter Ins titute o f
Technolog y–Dub ai
John Aik en, Univ ersity o f Colorado –Boulder
Raymond Beng e, Terrant C ounty C olleg e
Gavin B uxton , Robert Morris Univ ersity
Erik Chris tensen , South Florida Sta te C olleg e
Clifton Clark , Fort Ha ys Sta te Univ ersity
Nelson C oates, California Maritime A cadem y
Her ve Collin , Kapi’olani C ommunity C olleg e
Carl C ovatto, Ariz ona Sta te Univ ersity
Alejandro C ozzani , Imp erial V alley Colleg e
Danielle Dala fave, The C olleg e of New J erse y
Nicholas Darnton , Georgia Ins titute o f Technolog y
Ethan Dene ault, Univ ersity o f Tamp a
Kenneth DeNisc o, Harrisburg Are a Community
Colleg e
Robert Edmonds , Tarrant C ounty C olleg e
William F alls, Erie C ommunity C olleg e
Stanle y Forres ter, Bro ward C olleg e
Umesh G arg, Univ ersity o f Notre Dame
Maurizio Giannot ti, Barr y Univ ersityBryan Gibbs , Dallas C ounty C ommunity C olleg e
Lynn Gillet te, Pima C ommunity C olleg e–West
Campus
Mark Giroux , Eas t Tennes see Sta te Univ ersity
Matthew Griffiths , Univ ersity o f New Ha ven
Alfonso Hinojosa, Univ ersity o f Texas–Arlington
Steuard J ensen , Alma C olleg e
David K agan, Univ ersity o f Mas sachuset ts
Serg ei K atsev , Univ ersity o f Minnesota–Duluth
Greg ory Lapicki , Eas t Carolina Univ ersity
Jill Legg ett, Florida Sta te C olleg e–Jackson ville
Alfredo Louro , Univ ersity o f Calgary
James Maclaren , Tulane Univ ersity
Ponn Mahes warana than , Winthrop Univ ersity
Seth Major , Hamilton C olleg e
Oleg Maksimo v, Excelsior C olleg e
Aris tides Marc ano, Dela ware Sta te Univ ersity
James McDonald , Univ ersity o f Har tford
Ralph McGrew , SUNY –Bro ome C ommunity C olleg e
Paul Miller , West Virginia Univ ersity
Tamar More , Univ ersity o f Portland
Farzaneh N ajma badi, Univ ersity o f Pho enix
Richard Olenick , The Univ ersity o f Dallas
Chris topher P orter, Ohio Sta te Univ ersity
Liza Pujji , Manaka u Ins titute o f Technolog y
Baishali Ra y, Young Harris Univ ersity
Andrew R obinson , Carleton Univ ersity
Aruvana R oy, Young Harris Univ ersity
Gajendra T ulsian , Da ytona Sta te C olleg e
Adria Up dike, Roger W illiams Univ ersity
Clark V angilder , Central Ariz ona Univ ersity
Stev en W olf, T exas Sta te Univ ersity
Alexander W urm , Western N ew England Univ ersity
Lei Zhang , Winston Salem Sta te Univ ersity
Ulrich Z urcher , Clev eland Sta te Univ ersity4 Preface
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

INTR ODUCTIONCHAP TER 1
The Natur e of Light
1.1The P ropagation o f Light
1.2The L aw o f Reflection
1.3Refraction
1.4Total Internal Re flection
1.5Disper sion
1.6Huygens ’s Principle
1.7Polariz ation
Our in vestigation o f light rev olves around tw o ques tions o f fundamental imp ortanc e: (1)
Wha t is the na ture o f light , and (2) ho w do es light b ehave under v arious circums tanc es? Ans wers to these
ques tions c an b e found in Maxw ell’s equa tions (in Electroma gnetic W aves), which pre dict the e xistenc e of
electroma gnetic w aves and their b ehavior . Examples o f light include radio and infrare d waves, visible light ,
ultra violet radia tion , and X -rays. Interes tingly , not all light phenomena c an b e explaine d by Maxw ell’s theor y.
Figur e1.1 Due t o total int ernal r eflection, an under water swimmer ’s imag e is r eflect ed back int o the w ater wher e
the camer a is locat ed. The cir cular ripple in the imag e center is actual ly on the w ater sur face. Due t o the vie wing
angle , total int ernal r eflection is not oc curring at the t op edg e of this imag e, and w e can see a vie w of activities on
the pool deck. (cr edit: modification o f work b y “ja yhem ”/Flickr)
Chap ter Outline

Exp eriments p erforme d early in the tw entieth c entur y sho wed tha t light has c orpuscular , or p article -like,
prop erties. The ide a tha t light c an displa y both w ave and p article characteris tics is c alledwave-particle
duality , which is e xamine d in Photons and Ma tter W aves.
In this chapter , we study the b asic prop erties o f light . In the ne xt few chapters , we investigate the b ehavior o f
light when it interacts with optic al devic es such as mirrors , lenses , and ap ertures .
1.1The P ropagation o f Light
Learning Objectiv es
By the end o f this section, y ou wil l be able t o:
•Determine the inde x of refraction, giv en the speed o f light in a medium
•List the w ays in which light tr avels fr om a sour ce to ano ther location
The sp eed of light in a v acuum cis one o f the fundamental c onstants o f ph ysics . As y ou will see when y ou re ach
Relativity , it is a c entral c oncept in Eins tein ’s theor y of rela tivity . As the ac curacy o f the me asurements o f the
speed of light impro ved, it w as found tha t diff erent obser vers, even those mo ving a t larg e velocities with
resp ect to e ach other , me asure the same v alue f or the sp eed of light . Ho wever, the sp eed of light do es v ary in a
precise manner with the ma terial it tra verses . These facts ha ve far -reaching implic ations , as w e will see in
later chapters .
The Speed o f Light : Early Measur ements
The firs t me asurement o f the sp eed of light w as made b y the Danish as tronomer Ole Roemer (1644–1710) in
1675. He s tudie d the orbit o f Io, one o f the f our larg e mo ons o f Jupiter , and f ound tha t it had a p erio d of
revolution o f 42.5 h around J upiter . He also disc overed tha t this v alue fluctua ted by a f ew sec onds , dep ending
on the p osition o f Ear th in its orbit around the Sun . Roemer re alized tha t this fluctua tion w as due to the finite
speed of light and c ould b e use d to determine c.
Roemer f ound the p erio d of rev olution o f Io b y me asuring the time inter val between suc cessive eclipses b y
Jupiter .Figure 1.2 (a) sho ws the planetar y configura tions when such a me asurement is made from Ear th in the
part of its orbit where it is rec eding from J upiter . When Ear th is a t point A, Ear th, Jupiter , and Io are aligne d.
The ne xt time this alignment o ccurs , Ear th is a t point B, and the light c arrying tha t inf orma tion to Ear th mus t
travel to tha t point . Sinc eBis far ther from J upiter than A, light tak es more time to re ach Ear th when Ear th is a t
B. Now ima gine it is a bout 6 months la ter, and the planets are arrang ed as in p art (b) of the figure . The
measurement o f Io’s perio d begins with Ear th a t point and Io eclipse d by Jupiter . The ne xt eclipse then
occurs when Ear th is a t point , to which the light c arrying the inf orma tion o f this eclipse mus t tra vel. Sinc e
is closer to J upiter than , light tak es les s time to re ach Ear th when it is a t. This time inter val between
the suc cessive eclipses o f Io seen a t and is theref ore les s than the time inter val between the eclipses seen
atAand B. By me asuring the diff erenc e in these time inter vals and with appropria te kno wledge of the dis tanc e
between J upiter and Ear th, Roemer c alcula ted tha t the sp eed of light w as which is 33% b elow
the v alue ac cepte d to day.
Figur e1.2 Roemer ’s astronomical method f or det ermining the speed o f light. Measur ements o f Io’s period done with the c onfig urations
of par ts (a) and (b) diff er, because the light path length and as sociat ed tr avel time incr ease fr omAtoB(a) but decr ease fr om to (b).6 1 • The Natur e of Light
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

The firs t suc cessful terres trial me asurement o f the sp eed of light w as made b y Armand Fizeau(1819–1896) in
1849. He plac ed a to othe d wheel tha t could b e rota ted very rapidly on one hilltop and a mirror on a sec ond
hilltop 8 km a way (Figure 1.3 ). An intense light sourc e was plac ed behind the wheel , so tha t when the wheel
rota ted, it chopp ed the light b eam into a suc cession o f pulses . The sp eed of the wheel w as then adjus ted until
no light returne d to the obser ver lo cated behind the wheel . This c ould only happ en if the wheel rota ted
through an angle c orresp onding to a displac ement o f teeth , while the pulses tra veled do wn to the
mirror and b ack. Knowing the rota tional sp eed of the wheel , the numb er o f teeth on the wheel , and the
distanc e to the mirror , Fizeau determine d the sp eed of light to b e which is only 5% to o high .
Figur e1.3 Fizeau’s method f or measuring the speed o f light. The t eeth o f the wheel block the r eflect ed light upon r eturn when the wheel
is rotat ed at a r ate that mat ches the light tr avel time t o and fr om the mirr or.
The F rench ph ysicis t Jean Bernard Léon Foucault(1819–1868) mo difie d Fizeau’s app aratus b y replacing the
toothe d wheel with a rota ting mirror . In 1862, he me asure d the sp eed of light to b e which is
within 0.6% o f the presently ac cepte d value . AlbertMichelson (1852–1931) also use d Foucault’s metho d on
several o ccasions to me asure the sp eed of light . His firs t experiments w ere p erforme d in 1878; b y 1926, he
had refine d the technique so w ell tha t he f ound cto b e
Today, the sp eed of light is kno wn to gre at precision . In fact , the sp eed of light in a v acuum cis so imp ortant
that it is ac cepte d as one o f the b asic ph ysical quantities and has the v alue
where the appro xima te value o f is use d whenev er three -digit ac curacy is sufficient .
Speed o f Light in Mat ter
The sp eed of light through ma tter is les s than it is in a v acuum , because light interacts with a toms in a
material . The sp eed of light dep ends s trongly on the typ e of ma terial , sinc e its interaction v aries with diff erent
atoms , crystal la ttices, and other subs tructures . We can define a c onstant o f a ma terial tha t describ es the sp eed
of light in it , called the inde x of refract ion n:
where vis the obser ved sp eed of light in the ma terial .
Sinc e the sp eed of light is alw ays les s than cin ma tter and e quals conly in a v acuum , the inde x of refraction is
always gre ater than or e qual to one; tha t is, .Table 1.1 gives the indic es o f refraction f or some
representa tive subs tanc es. The v alues are lis ted for a p articular w avelength o f light , because the y vary slightly
with w avelength . (This c an ha ve imp ortant eff ects , such as c olors sep arated by a prism , as w e will see in1.1
1.21.1 • The P ropagation o f Light 7

Disp ersion .) Note tha t for g ases ,nis close to 1.0. This seems re asona ble, sinc e atoms in g ases are widely
separated, and light tra vels a tcin the v acuum b etween a toms . It is c ommon to tak e for g ases unles s
great precision is nee ded. Although the sp eed of light vin a me dium v aries c onsidera bly from its v alue cin a
vacuum , it is s till a larg e sp eed.
Medium n
Gases a t , 1 a tm
Air 1.000293
Carbon dio xide 1.00045
Hydrog en 1.000139
Oxy gen 1.000271
Liquids a t
Benz ene 1.501
Carbon disulfide 1.628
Carbon tetrachloride 1.461
Ethanol 1.361
Glycerine 1.473
Water, fresh 1.333
Solids a t
Diamond 2.419
Fluorite 1.434
Glas s, cro wn 1.52
Glas s, flint 1.66
Ice (at 1.309
Polystyrene 1.49
Plexiglas 1.51
Quar tz, cr ystalline 1.544
Quar tz, fuse d 1.458
Sodium chloride 1.5448 1 • The Natur e of Light
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Medium n
Zirc on 1.923
Table 1.1Inde x of Refraction in V arious Me dia For light with a w avelength o f 589 nm in a v acuum
EXAMPLE 1.1
Speed o f Light in Je welry
Calcula te the sp eed of light in zirc on, a ma terial use d in jew elry to imita te diamond .
Strategy
We can c alcula te the sp eed of light in a ma terial vfrom the inde x of refraction nof the ma terial , using the
equa tion
Solution
Rearranging the e qua tion forvgives us
The inde x of refraction f or zirc on is giv en as 1.923 in Table 1.1 , and cis giv en in Equa tion 1.1 . Entering these
values in the e qua tion giv es
Significanc e
This sp eed is slightly larg er than half the sp eed of light in a v acuum and is s till high c omp ared with sp eeds w e
normally e xperienc e. The only subs tanc e lis ted in Table 1.1 that has a gre ater inde x of refraction than zirc on is
diamond . We shall see la ter tha t the larg e inde x of refraction f or zirc on mak es it sp arkle more than glas s, but
less than diamond .
CHE CK Y OUR UNDER STANDING 1.1
Table 1.1 shows tha t ethanol and fresh w ater ha ve very similar indic es o f refraction . By wha t percenta ge do the
speeds o f light in these liquids diff er?
The Ray Model o f Light
You ha ve alre ady s tudie d some o f the w ave characteris tics o f light in the previous chapter on Electroma gnetic
Waves. In this chapter , we start mainly with the ra y characteris tics. There are three w ays in which light c an
travel from a sourc e to another lo cation ( Figure 1.4 ). It c an c ome directly from the sourc e through empty sp ace,
such as from the Sun to Ear th. Or light c an tra vel through v arious me dia, such as air and glas s, to the obser ver.
Light c an also arriv e after b eing reflecte d, such as b y a mirror . In all o f these c ases , we can mo del the p ath o f
light as a s traight line c alled aray.1.1 • The P ropagation o f Light 9

Figur e1.4 Three methods f or light t o travel from a sour ce to another location. (a) Light r eaches the upper atmospher e of Ear th, tr aveling
through emp ty spac e dir ectly from the sour ce. (b) Light can r each a person b y traveling thr ough media lik e air and glas s. (c) Light can also
reflect fr om an object lik e a mirr or. In the situations sho wn her e, light int eracts with objects lar ge enough that it tr avels in s traight lines , like
a ray.
Exp eriments sho w tha t when light interacts with an object sev eral times larg er than its w avelength , it tra vels in
straight lines and acts lik e a ra y. Its w ave characteris tics are not pronounc ed in such situa tions . Sinc e the
wavelength o f visible light is les s than a micron (a thousandth o f a millimeter), it acts lik e a ra y in the man y
common situa tions in which it enc ounters objects larg er than a micron . For e xample , when visible light
encounters an ything larg e enough tha t we can obser ve it with unaide d eyes, such as a c oin, it acts lik e a ra y,
with g enerally negligible w ave characteris tics.
In all o f these c ases , we can mo del the p ath o f light as s traight lines . Light ma y chang e direction when it
encounters objects (such as a mirror) or in p assing from one ma terial to another (such as in p assing from air to
glas s), but it then c ontinues in a s traight line or as a ra y. The w ord “ra y” comes from ma thema tics and here
means a s traight line tha t origina tes a t some p oint . It is ac cepta ble to visualiz e light ra ys as laser ra ys. The ray
model o f light describ es the p ath o f light as s traight lines .
Sinc e light mo ves in s traight lines , changing directions when it interacts with ma terials , its p ath is describ ed
by geometr y and simple trig onometr y. This p art of optics , where the ra y asp ect o f light domina tes, is theref ore
calledgeometric opt ics. Tw o laws govern ho w light chang es direction when it interacts with ma tter. These are
the law of reflection , for situa tions in which light b ounc es o ff ma tter, and the law of refraction , for situa tions in
which light p asses through ma tter. We will e xamine more a bout e ach o f these la ws in up coming sections o f this
chapter .
1.2The L aw o f Reflection
Learning Objectiv es
By the end o f this section, y ou wil l be able t o:
•Explain the r eflection o f light fr om polished and r ough sur faces
•Describe the principle and applications o f corner r eflectors
Whenev er w e look into a mirror , or squint a t sunlight glinting from a lak e, we are seeing a reflection . When y ou
look a t a piec e of white p aper, you are seeing light sc attere d from it . Larg e telesc opes use reflection to f orm an
ima ge of stars and other as tronomic al objects .
The law of reflect ion states tha t the angle o f reflection e quals the angle o f incidenc e, or
The la w of reflection is illus trated in Figure 1.5 , which also sho ws ho w the angle o f incidenc e and angle o f
reflection are me asure d rela tive to the p erpendicular to the sur face at the p oint where the light ra y strikes.1.310 1 • The Natur e of Light
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Figur e1.5 The la w of reflection s tates that the angle o f reflection equals the angle o f incidenc e— The angles ar e measur ed
relativ e to the perpendicular t o the sur face at the point wher e the r ay strikes the sur face.
We expect to see reflections from smo oth sur faces, but Figure 1.6 illus trates ho w a rough sur face reflects light .
Sinc e the light s trikes diff erent p arts of the sur face at diff erent angles , it is reflecte d in man y diff erent
directions , or diffuse d.Diffuse d light is wha t allo ws us to see a sheet o f paper from an y angle , as sho wn in
Figure 1.7 (a). P eople , clothing , leaves, and w alls all ha ve rough sur faces and c an b e seen from all sides . A
mirror , on the other hand , has a smo oth sur face (comp ared with the w avelength o f light) and reflects light a t
specific angles , as illus trated in Figure 1.7 (b). When the Mo on reflects from a lak e, as sho wn in Figure 1.7 (c), a
combina tion o f these eff ects tak es plac e.
Figur e1.6 Light is diffused when it r eflects fr om a r ough sur face. Her e, man y par allel rays are incident, but the y are reflect ed at man y
different angles , because the sur face is r ough.
Figur e1.7 (a) When a sheet o f paper is il luminat ed with man y par allel incident r ays, it can be seen at man y diff erent angles , because its
surface is r ough and diffuses the light. (b) A mirr or illuminat ed b y man y par allel rays reflects them in onl y one dir ection, because its sur face
is very smooth. Onl y the obser ver at a par ticular angle sees the r eflect ed light. (c) Moonlight is spr ead out when it is r eflect ed b y the lak e,
because the sur face is shin y but une ven. (cr edit c: modification o f work b y Dieg o Torres Sil vestre)1.2 • The L aw o f Reflection 11

When y ou see y ourself in a mirror , it app ears tha t the ima ge is actually b ehind the mirror ( Figure 1.8 ). W e see
the light c oming from a direction determine d by the la w of reflection . The angles are such tha t the ima ge is
exactly the same dis tanc e behind the mirror as y ou s tand in front o f the mirror . If the mirror is on the w all o f a
room, the ima ges in it are all b ehind the mirror , which c an mak e the ro om seem bigg er. Although these mirror
ima ges mak e objects app ear to b e where the y cannot b e (like behind a solid w all), the ima ges are not figments
of your ima gina tion . Mirror ima ges c an b e photographe d and videotap ed by ins truments and lo ok jus t as the y
do with our e yes (which are optic al ins truments themselv es). The precise manner in which ima ges are f orme d
by mirrors and lenses is discus sed in an up coming chapter on Geometric Optics and Ima ge Forma tion .
Figur e1.8 (a) Y our imag e in a mirr or is behind the mirr or. The tw o rays sho wn ar e those that s trike the mirr or at jus t the c orrect angles t o
be reflect ed int o the e yes o f the person. The imag e appears t o be behind the mirr or at the same dis tanc e away as (b) if y ou w ere looking at
your twin dir ectly, with no mirr or.
Corner Re flectors (Re troreflectors)
A light ra y tha t strikes an object c onsis ting o f two mutually p erpendicular reflecting sur faces is reflecte d back
exactly p arallel to the direction from which it c ame ( Figure 1.9 ). This is tr ue whenev er the reflecting sur faces
are p erpendicular , and it is indep endent o f the angle o f incidenc e. (For pro of, see Exercise 1.34 at the end o f
this section .) Such an object is c alled acorner reflector , sinc e the light b ounc es from its inside c orner . Corner
reflectors are a sub clas s of retroreflectors , which all reflect ra ys back in the directions from which the y came .
Although the g eometr y of the pro of is much more c omple x, corner reflectors c an also b e built with three
mutually p erpendicular reflecting sur faces and are useful in three -dimensional applic ations .
Figur e1.9 A light r ay that s trikes tw o mutual ly perpendicular r eflecting sur faces is r eflect ed back e xactl y par allel to the dir ection fr om
which it came .
Man y ine xpensiv e reflector but tons on bicy cles , cars, and w arning signs ha ve corner reflectors designe d to12 1 • The Natur e of Light
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

return light in the direction from which it origina ted. Rather than simply reflecting light o ver a wide angle ,
retroreflection ensures high visibility if the obser ver and the light sourc e are lo cated tog ether , such as a c ar’s
driv er and he adlights . The A pollo as trona uts plac ed a tr ue c orner reflector on the Mo on ( Figure 1.10 ). Laser
signals from Ear th can b e bounc ed from tha t corner reflector to me asure the gradually incre asing dis tanc e to
the Mo on o f a few c entimeters p er year.
Figur e1.10 (a) As tronauts plac ed a c orner r eflect or on the Moon t o measur e its gr adual ly incr easing orbital dis tanc e. (b) The bright spots
on these bicy cle saf ety r eflect ors ar e reflections o f the flash o f the camer a that t ook this pictur e on a dark night. (cr edit a: modification o f
work b y NASA; cr edit b: modification o f work b y “Julo ”/Wikimedia Commons)
Working on the same principle as these optic al reflectors , corner reflectors are routinely use d as radar
reflectors ( Figure 1.11 ) for radio -frequency applic ations . Under mos t circums tanc es, small b oats made o f
fiberglas s or w ood do not s trongly reflect radio w aves emit ted by radar s ystems . To mak e these b oats visible to
radar (to a void c ollisions , for e xample), radar reflectors are a ttache d to b oats, usually in high plac es.
Figur e1.11 A radar r eflect or hois ted on a sailboat is a type o f corner r eflect or. (credit: Tim Sheerman-Chase)
As a c ountere xample , if y ou are interes ted in building a s tealth airplane , radar reflections should b e minimiz ed
to ev ade detection . One o f the design c onsidera tions w ould then b e to a void building corners into the
airframe .
1.3Refraction
Learning Objectiv es
By the end o f this section, y ou wil l be able t o:
•Describe ho w rays change dir ection upon entering a medium
•Apply the law o f refraction in pr oblem solving
You ma y often notic e some o dd things when lo oking into a fish tank . For e xample , you ma y see the same fish1.3 • Re fraction 13

app earing to b e in tw o diff erent plac es (Figure 1.12 ). This happ ens b ecause light c oming from the fish to y ou
chang es direction when it le aves the tank , and in this c ase, it c an tra vel tw o diff erent p aths to g et to y our e yes.
The changing o f a light ra y’s direction ( loosely c alled bending ) when it p asses through subs tanc es o f diff erent
refractiv e indic es is c alledrefract ion and is rela ted to chang es in the sp eed of light , . Refraction is
resp onsible f or a tremendous rang e of optic al phenomena, from the action o f lenses to da ta transmis sion
through optic al fib ers.
Figur e1.12 (a) L ooking at the fish tank as sho wn, w e can see the same fish in tw o diff erent locations , because light chang es dir ections
when it pas ses fr om w ater to air . In this case , the light can r each the obser ver by tw o diff erent paths , so the fish seems t o be in tw o
different plac es. This bending o f light is cal led r efraction and is r esponsible f or man y op tical phenomena . (b) This imag e sho ws refraction o f
light fr om a fish near the t op o f a fish tank.
Figure 1.13 shows ho w a ra y of light chang es direction when it p asses from one me dium to another . As b efore,
the angles are me asure d rela tive to a p erpendicular to the sur face at the p oint where the light ra y cros ses it .
(Some o f the incident light is reflecte d from the sur face, but f or no w w e concentra te on the light tha t is
transmit ted.) The chang e in direction o f the light ra y dep ends on the rela tive values o f the indic es o f refraction
(The P ropagation o f Light ) of the tw o me dia in volved. In the situa tions sho wn, me dium 2 has a gre ater inde x of
refraction than me dium 1. N ote tha t as sho wn in Figure 1.13 (a), the direction o f the ra y mo ves closer to the
perpendicular when it progres ses from a me dium with a lo wer inde x of refraction to one with a higher inde x of
refraction . Conversely , as sho wn in Figure 1.13 (b), the direction o f the ra y mo ves a way from the p erpendicular
when it progres ses from a me dium with a higher inde x of refraction to one with a lo wer inde x of refraction .
The p ath is e xactly rev ersible .14 1 • The Natur e of Light
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Figur e1.13 The chang e in dir ection o f a light r ay depends on ho w the inde x of refraction chang es when it cr osses fr om one medium t o
another . In the situations sho wn her e, the inde x of refraction is gr eater in medium 2 than in medium 1. (a) A r ay of light mo ves closer t o the
perpendicular when ent ering a medium with a higher inde x of refraction. (b) A r ay of light mo ves a way from the perpendicular when
entering a medium with a lo wer inde x of refraction.
The amount tha t a light ra y chang es its direction dep ends b oth on the incident angle and the amount tha t the
speed chang es. For a ra y at a giv en incident angle , a larg e chang e in sp eed causes a larg e chang e in direction
and thus a larg e chang e in angle . The e xact ma thema tical rela tionship is the law of refract ion, orSnell ’s law,
after the Dutch ma thema tician W illebrord Snell (1591–1626), who disc overed it in 1621. While the la w has
been name d after Snell , the Ara bian ph ysicis t Ibn Sahl f ound the la w of refraction in 984 and use d it in his
work On B urning Mirrors and Lenses . The la w of refraction is s tated in e qua tion f orm as
Here and are the indic es o f refraction f or me dia 1 and 2, and and are the angles b etween the ra ys
and the p erpendicular in me dia 1 and 2. The inc oming ra y is c alled the incident ra y, the out going ra y is c alled
the refracte d ra y, and the as sociated angles are the incident angle and the refracte d angle , resp ectiv ely.
Snell ’s experiments sho wed tha t the la w of refraction is ob eyed and tha t a characteris tic inde x of refraction n
could b e as signe d to a giv en me dium and its v alue me asure d. Snell w as not a ware tha t the sp eed of light v arie d
in diff erent me dia, a k ey fact use d when w e deriv e the la w of refraction theoretic ally using Huy gens’ s principle
inHuy gens’ s Principle .
EXAMPLE 1.2
Determining the Inde x of Refraction
Find the inde x of refraction f or me dium 2 in Figure 1.13 (a), as suming me dium 1 is air and giv en tha t the
incident angle is and the angle o f refraction is .
Strategy
The inde x of refraction f or air is tak en to b e 1 in mos t cases (and up to f our signific ant figures , it is 1.000).
Thus , here . From the giv en inf orma tion , and With this inf orma tion , the only
unkno wn in Snell ’s law is so w e can use Snell ’s law to find it .
Solution
From Snell ’s law w e ha ve1.41.3 • Re fraction 15

Entering kno wn v alues ,
Significanc e
This is the inde x of refraction f or w ater, and Snell c ould ha ve determine d it b y me asuring the angles and
performing this c alcula tion . He w ould then ha ve found 1.33 to b e the appropria te inde x of refraction f or w ater
in all other situa tions , such as when a ra y passes from w ater to glas s. Today, we can v erify tha t the inde x of
refraction is rela ted to the sp eed of light in a me dium b y me asuring tha t speed directly .
INTER ACTIVE
Explore bending o f light (https:/ /openstax.org/l/21b endo flight) between tw o me dia with diff erent indic es o f
refraction . Use the “Intro ” simula tion and see ho w changing from air to w ater to glas s chang es the b ending
angle . Use the protractor to ol to me asure the angles and see if y ou c an recre ate the c onfigura tion in Example
1.2. Also b y me asurement , confirm tha t the angle o f reflection e quals the angle o f incidenc e.
EXAMPLE 1.3
A Larger Chang e in Dir ection
Supp ose tha t in a situa tion lik e tha t in Example 1.2 , light g oes from air to diamond and tha t the incident angle
is . Calcula te the angle o f refraction in the diamond .
Strategy
Again, the inde x of refraction f or air is tak en to b e , and w e are giv en . We can lo ok up the
inde x of refraction f or diamond in Table 1.1 , finding . The only unkno wn in Snell ’s law is , which
we wish to determine .
Solution
Solving Snell ’s law for yields
Entering kno wn v alues ,
The angle is thus
Significanc e
For the same angle o f incidenc e, the angle o f refraction in diamond is signific antly smaller than in w ater
rather than —see Example 1.2 ). This me ans there is a larg er chang e in direction in diamond . The
cause o f a larg e chang e in direction is a larg e chang e in the inde x of refraction (or sp eed). In g eneral , the larg er
the chang e in sp eed, the gre ater the eff ect on the direction o f the ra y.
CHE CK Y OUR UNDER STANDING 1.2
InTable 1.1 , the solid with the ne xt highes t inde x of refraction a fter diamond is zirc on. If the diamond in
Example 1.3 were replac ed with a piec e of zirc on, wha t would b e the new angle o f refraction?16 1 • The Natur e of Light
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

1.4Total Internal Re flection
Learning Objectiv es
By the end o f this section, y ou wil l be able t o:
•Explain the phenomenon o f total internal r eflection
•Describe the w orkings and uses o f optical fiber s
•Analy ze the r eason f or the sparkle o f diamonds
A good-quality mirror ma y reflect more than of the light tha t falls on it , absorbing the res t. But it w ould b e
useful to ha ve a mirror tha t reflects all o f the light tha t falls on it . Interes tingly , we can pro duce total reflection
using an asp ect o f refraction .
Consider wha t happ ens when a ra y of light s trikes the sur face between tw o ma terials , as sho wn in Figure
1.14 (a). P art of the light cros ses the b oundar y and is refracte d; the res t is reflecte d. If, as sho wn in the figure ,
the inde x of refraction f or the sec ond me dium is les s than f or the firs t, the ra y bends a way from the
perpendicular . (Sinc e the angle o f refraction is gre ater than the angle o f incidenc e—tha t is,
Now ima gine wha t happ ens as the incident angle incre ases . This c auses to incre ase also . The larg est the
angle o f refraction can b e is , as sho wn in p art (b). The crit ical angle for a c ombina tion o f ma terials is
define d to b e the incident angle that pro duces an angle o f refraction o f . Tha t is, is the incident angle
for which . If the incident angle is gre ater than the critic al angle , as sho wn in Figure 1.14 (c), then
all o f the light is reflecte d back into me dium 1, a c ondition c alledtotal internal reflect ion. (As the figure
shows, the reflecte d ra ys ob ey the la w of reflection so tha t the angle o f reflection is e qual to the angle o f
incidenc e in all three c ases .)
Figur e1.14 (a) A r ay of light cr osses a boundar y wher e the inde x of refraction decr eases . That is , The r ay bends a way from the
perpendicular . (b) The critical angle is the angle o f incidenc e for which the angle o f refraction is (c) T otal int ernal r eflection oc curs
when the incident angle is gr eater than the critical angle .
Snell ’s law states the rela tionship b etween angles and indic es o f refraction . It is giv en b y
When the incident angle e quals the critic al angle , the angle o f refraction is . Noting
that Snell ’s law in this c ase b ecomes
The critic al angle for a giv en c ombina tion o f ma terials is thus
Total internal reflection o ccurs f or an y incident angle gre ater than the critic al angle , and it c an only o ccur
when the sec ond me dium has an inde x of refraction les s than the firs t. Note tha t this e qua tion is writ ten f or a
light ra y tha t tra vels in me dium 1 and reflects from me dium 2, as sho wn in Figure 1.14 .1.51.4 • T otal Internal Re flection 17

EXAMPLE 1.4
Determining a Critical Angle
Wha t is the critic al angle f or light tra veling in a p olystyrene (a typ e of plas tic) pip e surrounde d by air? The
inde x of refraction f or p olystyrene is 1.49.
Strategy
The inde x of refraction o f air c an b e tak en to b e 1.00, as b efore. Thus , the c ondition tha t the sec ond me dium
(air) has an inde x of refraction les s than the firs t (plas tic) is sa tisfied, and w e can use the e qua tion
to find the critic al angle where and
Solution
Subs tituting the identifie d values giv es
Significanc e
This result me ans tha t an y ra y of light inside the plas tic tha t strikes the sur face at an angle gre ater than
is totally reflecte d. This mak es the inside sur face of the cle ar plas tic a p erfect mirror f or such ra ys, without an y
need for the silv ering use d on c ommon mirrors . Diff erent c ombina tions o f ma terials ha ve diff erent critic al
angles , but an y combina tion with can pro duce total internal reflection . The same c alcula tion as made
here sho ws tha t the critic al angle f or a ra y going from w ater to air is , where as tha t from diamond to air is
, and tha t from flint glas s to cro wn glas s is .
CHE CK Y OUR UNDER STANDING 1.3
At the sur face between air and w ater, light ra ys can g o from air to w ater and from w ater to air . For which ra y is
there no p ossibility o f total internal reflection?
In the photo tha t op ens this chapter , the ima ge of a s wimmer under water is c apture d by a c amera tha t is also
under water. The s wimmer in the upp er half o f the photograph , app arently facing up ward, is, in fact , a reflecte d
ima ge of the s wimmer b elow. The circular ripple ne ar the photograph ’s center is actually on the w ater sur face.
The undis turb ed water surrounding it mak es a g ood reflecting sur face when view ed from b elow, thanks to total
internal reflection . Ho wever, at the v ery top e dge of this photograph , rays from b elow strike the sur face with
incident angles les s than the critic al angle , allo wing the c amera to c apture a view o f activities on the p ool deck
above water.
Fiber Op tics: Endoscopes to T elephones
Fiber optics is one applic ation o f total internal reflection tha t is in wide use . In c ommunic ations , it is use d to
transmit telephone , internet , and c able T V signals .Fiber opt icsemplo ys the transmis sion o f light do wn fib ers
of plas tic or glas s. Bec ause the fib ers are thin , light entering one is lik ely to s trike the inside sur face at an angle
greater than the critic al angle and , thus , be totally reflecte d (Figure 1.15 ). The inde x of refraction outside the
fiber mus t be smaller than inside . In fact , mos t fib ers ha ve a v arying refractiv e inde x to allo w more light to b e
guide d along the fib er through total internal refraction . Rays are reflecte d around c orners as sho wn, making
the fib ers into tin y light pip es.18 1 • The Natur e of Light
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Figur e1.15 Light ent ering a thin op tic fiber ma y strike the inside sur face at lar ge or gr azing angles and is c omplet ely reflect ed if these
angles e xceed the critical angle . Such r ays continue do wn the fiber , even following it ar ound c orners , sinc e the angles o f reflection and
incidenc e remain lar ge.
Bundles o f fib ers c an b e use d to transmit an ima ge without a lens , as illus trated in Figure 1.16 . The output o f a
devic e called an endosc opeis sho wn in Figure 1.16 (b). Endosc opes are use d to e xplore the interior o f the b ody
through its na tural orific es or minor incisions . Light is transmit ted do wn one fib er bundle to illumina te
internal p arts, and the reflecte d light is transmit ted back out through another bundle to b e obser ved.
Figur e1.16 (a) An imag e “A” is tr ansmit ted b y a bundle o f optical fibers . (b) An endosc ope is used t o probe the body , both tr ansmit ting
light t o the int erior and r eturning an imag e such as the one sho wn o f a human epiglot tis (a s tructur e at the base o f the t ongue). (cr edit b:
modification o f work b y “Med_ Chaos”/ Wikimedia Commons)
Fiber optics has rev olutioniz ed surgic al techniques and obser vations within the b ody, with a hos t of me dical
diagnos tic and therap eutic uses . Surg ery can b e performe d, such as ar throsc opic surg ery on a knee or
shoulder joint , emplo ying cut ting to ols a ttache d to and obser ved with the endosc ope. Samples c an also b e
obtaine d, such as b y las soing an intes tinal p olyp f or e xternal e xamina tion . The fle xibility o f the fib er optic
bundle allo ws do ctors to na vigate it around small and difficult -to-reach regions in the b ody, such as the
intes tines , the he art, blo od vessels , and joints . Transmis sion o f an intense laser b eam to burn a way obs tructing
plaques in major ar teries , as w ell as deliv ering light to activ ate chemotherap y dr ugs, are b ecoming1.4 • T otal Internal Re flection 19

commonplac e. Optic al fib ers ha ve in fact ena bled microsurg ery and remote surg ery where the incisions are
small and the surg eon’s fing ers do not nee d to touch the dise ased tis sue.
Optic al fib ers in bundles are surrounde d by acladding material tha t has a lo wer inde x of refraction than the
core ( Figure 1.17 ). The cladding prev ents light from b eing transmit ted between fib ers in a bundle . Without
cladding , light c ould p ass between fib ers in c ontact , sinc e their indic es o f refraction are identic al. Sinc e no
light g ets into the cladding (there is total internal reflection b ack into the c ore), none c an b e transmit ted
between clad fib ers tha t are in c ontact with one another . Ins tead, the light is prop agated along the length o f the
fiber, minimizing the los s of signal and ensuring tha t a quality ima ge is f orme d at the other end . The cladding
and an additional protectiv e layer mak e optic al fib ers dura ble as w ell as fle xible .
Figur e1.17 Fibers in bundles ar e clad b y a mat erial that has a lo wer inde x of refraction than the c ore to ensur e total int ernal r eflection,
even when fibers ar e in c ontact with one another .
Special tin y lenses tha t can b e attache d to the ends o f bundles o f fib ers ha ve been designe d and fa bric ated.
Light emerging from a fib er bundle c an b e focuse d through such a lens , ima ging a tin y sp ot. In some c ases , the
spot can b e sc anne d, allo wing quality ima ging o f a region inside the b ody. Special minute optic al filters
inser ted at the end o f the fib er bundle ha ve the c apacity to ima ge the interior o f org ans lo cated tens o f microns
below the sur face without cut ting the sur face—an are a kno wn as nonintr usiv e dia gnos tics. This is p articularly
useful f or determining the e xtent o f cancers in the s tomach and b owel.
In another typ e of applic ation , optic al fib ers are c ommonly use d to c arry signals f or telephone c onversa tions
and internet c ommunic ations . Extensiv e optic al fib er cables ha ve been plac ed on the o cean flo or and
underground to ena ble optic al communic ations . Optic al fib er communic ation s ystems o ffer sev eral
advanta ges o ver electric al (c opp er)-b ased systems , particularly f or long dis tanc es. The fib ers c an b e made so
transp arent tha t light c an tra vel man y kilometers b efore it b ecomes dim enough to re quire
amplific ation—much sup erior to c opp er conductors . This prop erty of optic al fib ers is c alled low los s. Lasers
emit light with characteris tics tha t allo w far more c onversa tions in one fib er than are p ossible with electric
signals on a single c onductor . This prop erty of optic al fib ers is c alledhigh b andwidth . Optic al signals in one
fiber do not pro duce undesira ble eff ects in other adjac ent fib ers. This prop erty of optic al fib ers is c alled
reduced cros stalk . We shall e xplore the unique characteris tics o f laser radia tion in a la ter chapter .
Corner Re flectors and Diamonds
Corner reflectors ( The La w of Reflection ) are p erfectly efficient when the c onditions f or total internal reflection
are sa tisfied. With c ommon ma terials , it is e asy to obtain a critic al angle tha t is les s than One use o f these
perfect mirrors is in bino culars , as sho wn in Figure 1.18 . Another use is in p erisc opes found in submarines .20 1 • The Natur e of Light
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Figur e1.18 These binoculars emplo y corner r eflect ors (prisms) with t otal int ernal r eflection t o get light t o the obser ver’s eyes.
Total internal reflection , couple d with a larg e inde x of refraction , explains wh ydiamonds sparkle more than
other ma terials . The critic al angle f or a diamond-to -air sur face is only , so when light enters a diamond , it
has trouble g etting b ack out ( Figure 1.19 ). Although light freely enters the diamond , it c an e xit only if it mak es
an angle les s than . Facets on diamonds are sp ecific ally intende d to mak e this unlik ely. Go od diamonds
are v ery cle ar, so tha t the light mak es man y internal reflections and is c oncentra ted before e xiting—henc e the
bright sp arkle . (Zirc on is a na tural g ems tone tha t has an e xceptionally larg e inde x of refraction , but it is not as
larg e as diamond , so it is not as highly priz ed. Cubic zirc onia is manufacture d and has an ev en higher inde x of
refraction , but it is s till les s than tha t of diamond .) The c olors y ou see emerging from a cle ar diamond
are not due to the diamond ’s color , which is usually ne arly c olorles s. The c olors result from disp ersion , which
we discus s in Disp ersion . Colore d diamonds g et their c olor from s tructural def ects o f the cr ystal la ttice and the
inclusion o f minute quantities o f graphite and other ma terials . The Arg yle Mine in W estern A ustralia pro duces
around 90% o f the w orld ’s pink , red, champ agne, and c ognac diamonds , where as around 50% o f the w orld ’s
clear diamonds c ome from c entral and southern Afric a.
Figur e1.19 Light cannot easil y escape a diamond, because its critical angle with air is so smal l. Mos t reflections ar e total, and the fac ets
are plac ed so that light can e xit onl y in par ticular w ays—thus c oncentr ating the light and making the diamond sparkle brightl y.
INTER ACTIVE
Explore refraction and reflection o f light (https:/ /openstax.org/l/21b endo flight) between tw o me dia with1.4 • T otal Internal Re flection 21

different indic es o f refraction . Try to mak e the refracte d ra y disapp ear with total internal reflection . Use the
protractor to ol to me asure the critic al angle and c omp are with the pre diction from Equa tion 1.5 .
1.5Disper sion
Learning Objectiv es
By the end o f this section, y ou wil l be able t o:
•Explain the cause o f disper sion in a prism
•Describe the e ffects of disper sion in pr oducing r ainbo ws
•Summariz e the adv antages and disadv antages o f disper sion
Everyone enjo ys the sp ectacle o f a rainb ow glimmering a gains t a dark s torm y sky . Ho w do es sunlight falling on
clear drops o f rain g et brok en into the rainb ow of colors w e see? The same pro cess causes white light to b e
brok en into c olors b y a cle ar glas s prism or a diamond ( Figure 1.20 ).
Figur e1.20 The c olors o f the r ainbo w (a) and those pr oduc ed b y a prism (b) ar e identical . (credit a: modification o f work b y
“Alfredo55”/ Wikimedia Commons; cr edit b: modification o f work b y NASA)
We see a bout six c olors in a rainb ow—re d, orang e, yellow, green , blue , and violet; sometimes indig o is lis ted,
too. These c olors are as sociated with diff erent w avelengths o f light , as sho wn in Figure 1.21 . When our e ye
receives pure -wavelength light , we tend to see only one o f the six c olors , dep ending on w avelength . The
thousands o f other hues w e can sense in other situa tions are our e ye’s resp onse to v arious mixtures o f
wavelengths . White light , in p articular , is a fairly unif orm mixture o f all visible w avelengths . Sunlight ,
considere d to b e white , actually app ears to b e a bit y ellow, because o f its mixture o f wavelengths , but it do es
contain all visible w avelengths . The se quenc e of colors in rainb ows is the same se quenc e as the c olors sho wn
in the figure . This implies tha t white light is spre ad out in a rainb ow ac cording to w avelength .Disp ersion is
define d as the spre ading o f white light into its full sp ectr um o f wavelengths . More technic ally, disp ersion
occurs whenev er the prop agation o f light dep ends on w avelength .
Figur e1.21 Even though r ainbo ws are as sociat ed with six c olors , the r ainbo w is a c ontinuous dis tribution o f colors ac cording t o
wavelengths .
Any typ e of wave can e xhibit disp ersion . For e xample , sound w aves, all typ es o f electroma gnetic w aves, and
water w aves c an b e disp erse d ac cording to w avelength . Disp ersion ma y re quire sp ecial circums tanc es and c an
result in sp ectacular displa ys such as in the pro duction o f a rainb ow. This is also tr ue for sound , sinc e all
frequencies ordinarily tra vel at the same sp eed. If y ou lis ten to sound through a long tub e, such as a v acuum
cleaner hose , you c an e asily he ar it disp erse d by interaction with the tub e. Disp ersion , in fact , can rev eal a
great deal about wha t the w ave has enc ountere d tha t disp erses its w avelengths . The disp ersion o f
electroma gnetic radia tion from outer sp ace, for e xample , has rev ealed much a bout wha t exists between the22 1 • The Natur e of Light
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

stars —the so -called inters tellar me dium .
INTER ACTIVE
Nick Mo ore’svideo (https:/ /openstax.org/l/21nickmo orevid) discus ses disp ersion o f a pulse as he taps a long
spring . Follow his e xplana tion as Mo ore repla ys the high-sp eed footage sho wing high fre quency w aves
outr unning the lo wer fre quency w aves.
Refraction is resp onsible f or disp ersion in rainb ows and man y other situa tions . The angle o f refraction
dep ends on the inde x of refraction , as w e kno w from Snell ’s law. We kno w tha t the inde x of refraction n
dep ends on the me dium . But for a giv en me dium ,nalso dep ends on w avelength ( Table 1.2 ). Note tha t for a
given me dium ,nincre ases as w avelength decre ases and is gre atest for violet light . Thus , violet light is b ent
more than re d light , as sho wn f or a prism in Figure 1.22 (b). White light is disp erse d into the same se quenc e of
wavelengths as seen in Figure 1.20 and Figure 1.21 .
MediumRed
(660 nm)Orange
(610 nm)Yellow
(580 nm)Green
(550 nm)Blue
(470 nm)Viole t
(410 nm)
Water 1.331 1.332 1.333 1.335 1.338 1.342
Diamond 2.410 2.415 2.417 2.426 2.444 2.458
Glas s, cro wn 1.512 1.514 1.518 1.519 1.524 1.530
Glas s, flint 1.662 1.665 1.667 1.674 1.684 1.698
Polystyrene 1.488 1.490 1.492 1.493 1.499 1.506
Quar tz, fuse d 1.455 1.456 1.458 1.459 1.462 1.468
Table 1.2Inde x of Refraction nin Selecte d Me dia a t Various W avelengths
Figur e1.22 (a) A pur e wavelength o f light fal ls ont o a prism and is r efracted at both sur faces. (b) Whit e light is dispersed b y the prism
(sho wn e xaggerated). Sinc e the inde x of refraction v aries with w avelength, the angles o f refraction v ary with w avelength. A sequenc e of red
to violet is pr oduc ed, because the inde x of refraction incr eases s teadil y with decr easing w avelength.
EXAMPLE 1.5
Dispersion o f Whit e Light b y Cr own Glas s
A beam o f white light g oes from air into cro wn glas s at an incidenc e angle o f . Wha t is the angle b etween
the re d (660 nm) and violet (410 nm) p arts of the refracte d light?1.5 • Disper sion 23

Strategy
Values f or the indic es o f refraction f or cro wn glas s at various w avelengths are lis ted in Table 1.2 . Use these
values f or c alcula te the angle o f refraction f or e ach c olor and then tak e the diff erenc e to find the disp ersion
angle .
Solution
Applying the la w of refraction f or the re d part of the b eam
we can solv e for the angle o f refraction as
Similarly , the angle o f incidenc e for the violet p art of the b eam is
The diff erenc e between these tw o angles is
Significanc e
Although may seem lik e a negligibly small angle , if this b eam is allo wed to prop agate a long enough
distanc e, the disp ersion o f colors b ecomes quite notic eable.
CHE CK Y OUR UNDER STANDING 1.4
In the prec eding e xample , how much dis tanc e inside the blo ck o f cro wn glas s would the re d and the violet ra ys
have to progres s before the y are sep arated by 1.0 mm?
Rainb ows are pro duced by a c ombina tion o f refraction and reflection . You ma y ha ve notic ed tha t you see a
rainb ow only when y ou lo ok a way from the Sun . Light enters a drop o f water and is reflecte d from the b ack o f
the drop ( Figure 1.23 ). The light is refracte d both as it enters and as it le aves the drop . Sinc e the inde x of
refraction o f water v aries with w avelength , the light is disp erse d, and a rainb ow is obser ved (Figure 1.24 (a)).24 1 • The Natur e of Light
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

(No disp ersion o ccurs a t the b ack sur face, because the la w of reflection do es not dep end on w avelength .) The
actual rainb ow of colors seen b y an obser ver dep ends on the m yriad ra ys being refracte d and reflecte d to ward
the obser ver’s eyes from numerous drops o f water. The eff ect is mos t spectacular when the b ackground is
dark , as in s torm y weather , but c an also b e obser ved in w aterfalls and la wn sprinklers . The arc o f a rainb ow
comes from the nee d to b e looking a t a sp ecific angle rela tive to the direction o f the Sun , as illus trated in p art
(b). If tw o reflections o f light o ccur within the w ater drop , another “ secondar y” rainb ow is pro duced. This rare
event pro duces an arc tha t lies a bove the primar y rainb ow arc , as in p art (c), and pro duces c olors in the
reverse order o f the primar y rainb ow, with re d at the lo west angle and violet a t the larg est angle .
Figur e1.23 A ray of light fal ling on this w ater dr op ent ers and is r eflect ed fr om the back o f the dr op. This light is r efracted and dispersed
both as it ent ers and as it lea ves the dr op.
Figur e1.24 (a) Diff erent c olors emer ge in diff erent dir ections , and so y ou mus t look at diff erent locations t o see the v arious c olors o f a
rainbo w. (b) The ar c of a rainbo w resul ts from the fact that a line betw een the obser ver and an y point on the ar c mus t mak e the c orrect
angle with the par allel rays of sunlight f or the obser ver to receive the r efracted rays. (c) Double r ainbo w. (credit c: modification o f work b y
“Nicholas”/ Wikimedia Commons)
Disp ersion ma y pro duce beautiful rainb ows, but it c an c ause problems in optic al systems . White light use d to
transmit mes sages in a fib er is disp erse d, spre ading out in time and ev entually o verlapping with other
mes sages. Sinc e a laser pro duces a ne arly pure w avelength , its light e xperienc es lit tle disp ersion , an adv anta ge
over white light f or transmis sion o f inf orma tion . In c ontras t, disp ersion o f electroma gnetic w aves c oming to us
from outer sp ace can b e use d to determine the amount o f ma tter the y pass through .1.5 • Disper sion 25

1.6Huygens ’s Principle
Learning Objectiv es
By the end o f this section, y ou wil l be able t o:
•Describe Huy gens ’s principle
•Use Huy gens ’s principle to e xplain the law o f reflection
•Use Huy gens ’s principle to e xplain the law o f refraction
•Use Huy gens ’s principle to e xplain dif fraction
So far in this chapter , we ha ve been discus sing optic al phenomena using the ra y mo del o f light . Ho wever, some
phenomena re quire analy sis and e xplana tions b ased on the w ave characteris tics o f light . This is p articularly
true when the w avelength is not negligible c omp ared to the dimensions o f an optic al devic e, such as a slit in
the c ase o fdiffraction . Huy gens’ s principle is an indisp ensa ble to ol for this analy sis.
Figure 1.25 shows ho w a trans verse w ave looks as view ed from a bove and from the side . A light w ave can b e
ima gine d to prop agate lik e this , although w e do not actually see it wiggling through sp ace. From a bove, we view
the w ave fronts (or w ave cres ts) as if w e were lo oking do wn on o cean w aves. The side view w ould b e a graph o f
the electric or ma gnetic field . The view from a bove is p erhaps more useful in dev eloping c oncepts a bout wave
optics.
Figur e1.25 A transverse w ave, such as an electr omagnetic light w ave, as vie wed fr om abo ve and fr om the side . The dir ection o f
propag ation is perpendicular t o the w ave fronts (or w ave crests) and is r epresent ed b y a r ay.
The Dutch scientis t Chris tiaan Huy gens (1629–1695) dev elop ed a useful technique f or determining in detail
how and where w aves prop agate. Star ting from some kno wn p osition ,Huy gens’ s principle states tha t every
point on a w ave front is a sourc e of wavelets tha t spre ad out in the f orward direction a t the same sp eed as the
wave itself. The new w ave front is tang ent to all o f the w avelets .
Figure 1.26 shows ho w Huy gens’ s principle is applie d. A w ave front is the long e dge tha t mo ves, for e xample ,
with the cres t or the trough . Each p oint on the w ave front emits a semicircular w ave tha t mo ves a t the
prop agation sp eedv. We can dra w these w avelets a t a time tlater, so tha t the y ha ve mo ved a dis tanc e
The new w ave front is a plane tang ent to the w avelets and is where w e would e xpect the w ave to b e a time t
later. Huy gens’ s principle w orks f or all typ es o f waves, including w ater w aves, sound w aves, and light w aves. It
is useful not only in describing ho w light w aves prop agate but also in e xplaining the la ws of reflection and
refraction . In addition , we will see tha t Huy gens’ s principle tells us ho w and where light ra ys inter fere.26 1 • The Natur e of Light
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Figur e1.26 Huygens’ s principle applied t o a s traight w ave front. Each point on the w ave front emits a semicir cular w avelet that mo ves a
distanc e The ne w wave front is a line tang ent t o the w avelets .
Reflection
Figure 1.27 shows ho w a mirror reflects an inc oming w ave at an angle e qual to the incident angle , verifying the
law of reflection . As the w ave front s trikes the mirror , wavelets are firs t emit ted from the left p art of the mirror
and then from the right . The w avelets closer to the left ha ve had time to tra vel far ther , pro ducing a w ave front
traveling in the direction sho wn.
Figur e1.27 Huygens’ s principle applied t o a plane w ave front s triking a mirr or. The w avelets sho wn w ere emit ted as each point on the
wave front s truck the mirr or. The tang ent t o these w avelets sho ws that the ne w wave front has been r eflect ed at an angle equal t o the
incident angle . The dir ection o f propag ation is perpendicular t o the w ave front, as sho wn b y the do wnward-pointing arr ows.
Refraction
The la w of refraction c an b e explaine d by applying Huy gens’ s principle to a w ave front p assing from one
medium to another ( Figure 1.28 ). Each w avelet in the figure w as emit ted when the w ave front cros sed the
inter face between the me dia. Sinc e the sp eed of light is smaller in the sec ond me dium , the w aves do not tra vel
as far in a giv en time , and the new w ave front chang es direction as sho wn. This e xplains wh y a ra y chang es
direction to b ecome closer to the p erpendicular when light slo ws do wn. Snell ’s law can b e deriv ed from the
geometr y in Figure 1.28 (Example 1.6 ).1.6 • Huy gens ’s Principle 27

Figur e1.28 Huygens’ s principle applied t o a plane w ave front tr aveling fr om one medium t o another , wher e its speed is les s. The r ay
bends t oward the perpendicular , sinc e the w avelets ha ve a lo wer speed in the sec ond medium.
EXAMPLE 1.6
Deriving the L aw of Refraction
By examining the g eometr y of the w ave fronts , deriv e the la w of refraction .
Strategy
Consider Figure 1.29 , which e xpands up onFigure 1.28 . It sho ws the incident w ave front jus t reaching the
surface at point A, while p oint Bis still w ell within me dium 1. In the time it tak es for a w avelet from Bto
reach on the sur face at speed a wavelet from Atravels into me dium 2 a dis tanc e of
where Note tha t in this e xample , is slo wer than because
Figur e1.29 Geometr y of the la w of refraction fr om medium 1 t o medium 2.
Solution
The segment on the sur face is share d by both the triangle inside me dium 1 and the triangle
inside me dium 2. N ote tha t from the g eometr y, the angle is equal to the angle o f incidenc e,.28 1 • The Natur e of Light
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Similarly , is .
The length o f is giv en in tw o ways as
Inverting the e qua tion and subs tituting from a bove and similarly , we obtain
Cancellation o f allows us to simplif y this e qua tion into the familiar f orm
Significanc e
Although the la w of refraction w as es tablishe d experimentally b y Snell and s tated in Refraction , its deriv ation
here re quires Huy gens’ s principle and the unders tanding tha t the sp eed of light is diff erent in diff erent me dia.
CHE CK Y OUR UNDER STANDING 1.5
InExample 1.6 , we had . If were decre ased such tha t and the sp eed of light in me dium 2 is
faster than in me dium 1, wha t would happ en to the length o f ? Wha t would happ en to the w ave front
and the direction o f the refracte d ra y?
INTER ACTIVE
This applet (https:/ /openstax.org/l/21w alfedaniref )by Walter F endt sho ws an anima tion o f reflection and
refraction using Huy gens’ s wavelets while y ou c ontrol the p arameters . Be sure to click on “N ext step” to
displa y the w avelets . You c an see the reflecte d and refracte d wave fronts f orming .
Diffraction
Wha t happ ens when a w ave passes through an op ening , such as light shining through an op en do or into a dark
room? F or light , we obser ve a sharp shado w of the do orway on the flo or o f the ro om, and no visible light b ends
around c orners into other p arts of the ro om. When sound p asses through a do or, we he ar it ev erywhere in the
room and thus obser ve tha t sound spre ads out when p assing through such an op ening ( Figure 1.30 ). Wha t is
the diff erenc e between the b ehavior o f sound w aves and light w aves in this c ase? The ans wer is tha t light has
very shor t wavelengths and acts lik e a ra y. Sound has w avelengths on the order o f the siz e of the do or and
bends around c orners (f or fre quency o f 1000 Hz,
about three times smaller than the width o f the do orway).1.6 • Huy gens ’s Principle 29

Figur e1.30 (a) Light pas sing thr ough a door way mak es a sharp outline on the floor . Sinc e light ’s wavelength is v ery smal l compar ed with
the siz e of the door , it acts lik e a r ay. (b) Sound w aves bend int o all par ts of the r oom, a w ave eff ect, because their w avelength is similar t o
the siz e of the door .
If we pass light through smaller op enings such as slits , we can use Huy gens’ s principle to see tha t light b ends
as sound do es (Figure 1.31 ). The b ending o f a w ave around the e dges o f an op ening or an obs tacle is c alled
diffraction . Diffraction is a w ave characteris tic and o ccurs f or all typ es o f waves. If diffraction is obser ved for
some phenomenon , it is evidenc e tha t the phenomenon is a w ave. Thus , the horiz ontal diffraction o f the laser
beam a fter it p asses through the slits in Figure 1.31 is evidenc e tha t light is a w ave. You will le arn a bout
diffraction in much more detail in the chapter on Diffraction .
Figur e1.31 Huygens’ s principle applied t o a plane w ave front s triking an opening . The edg es o f the w ave front bend aft er pas sing thr ough
the opening , a pr ocess cal led diffr action. The amount o f bending is mor e extreme f or a smal l opening , consis tent with the fact that w ave
char acteristics ar e mos t notic eable f or int eractions with objects about the same siz e as the w avelength.
1.7Polariz ation
Learning Objectiv es
By the end o f this section, y ou wil l be able t o:
•Explain the change in intensit y as polariz ed light passes thr ough a polarizing filter
•Calculate the e ffect of polariz ation b y reflection and Br ewster’s angle
•Describe the e ffect of polariz ation b y scat tering
•Explain the use o f polarizing materials in de vices such as L CDs
Polarizing sunglas ses are familiar to mos t of us. The y ha ve a sp ecial a bility to cut the glare o f light reflecte d30 1 • The Natur e of Light
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

from w ater or glas s (Figure 1.32 ). The y ha ve this a bility b ecause o f a w ave characteris tic o f light c alled
polariza tion . Wha t is p olariza tion? Ho w is it pro duced? Wha t are some o f its uses? The ans wers to these
ques tions are rela ted to the w ave character o f light .
Figur e1.32 These tw o phot ographs o f a riv er sho w the eff ect o f a polarizing fil ter in r educing glar e in light r eflect ed fr om the sur face of
water. Part (b) o f this fig ure was tak en with a polarizing fil ter and par t (a) w as not. As a r esul t, the r eflection o f clouds and sky obser ved in
part (a) is not obser ved in par t (b). P olarizing sunglas ses ar e par ticularl y useful on sno w and w ater. (credit a and cr edit b: modifications o f
work b y “Amithshs”/ Wikimedia Commons)
Malus ’s Law
Light is one typ e of electroma gnetic (EM) w ave. As note d in the previous chapter on Electroma gnetic W aves,
EM w aves are trans verse w avesconsis ting o f varying electric and ma gnetic fields tha t oscilla te p erpendicular
to the direction o f prop agation ( Figure 1.33 ). Ho wever, in g eneral , there are no sp ecific directions f or the
oscilla tions o f the electric and ma gnetic fields; the y vibra te in an y randomly oriente d plane p erpendicular to
the direction o f prop agation .Polarizat ion is the a ttribute tha t a w ave’s oscilla tions do ha ve a definite direction
rela tive to the direction o f prop agation o f the w ave. (This is not the same typ e of polariza tion as tha t discus sed
for the sep aration o f charg es.) Waves ha ving such a direction are said to b epolariz ed. For an EM w ave, we
define the direct ion of p olarizat ion to b e the direction p arallel to the electric field . Thus , we can think o f the
electric field arro ws as sho wing the direction o f polariza tion , as in Figure 1.33 .
Figur e1.33 An EM w ave, such as light, is a tr ansverse w ave. The electric and magnetic fields ar e perpendicular t o the dir ection o f
propag ation. The dir ection o f polarization o f the w ave is the dir ection o f the electric field.
To examine this fur ther , consider the trans verse w aves in the rop es sho wn in Figure 1.34 . The oscilla tions in
one rop e are in a v ertical plane and are said to b evertically p olariz ed. Those in the other rop e are in a
horiz ontal plane and are horiz ontally p olariz ed. If a v ertical slit is plac ed on the firs t rop e, the w aves p ass
through . Ho wever, a v ertical slit blo cks the horiz ontally p olariz ed waves. For EM w aves, the direction o f the
electric field is analog ous to the dis turb ances on the rop es.1.7 • P olariz ation 31

Figur e1.34 The tr ansverse oscil lations in one r ope (a) ar e in a v ertical plane , and those in the other r ope (b) ar e in a horiz ontal plane . The
first is said t o be v ertical ly polariz ed, and the other is said t o be horiz ontal ly polariz ed. V ertical slits pas s vertical ly polariz ed w aves and
block horiz ontal ly polariz ed w aves.
The Sun and man y other light sourc es pro duce waves tha t ha ve the electric fields in random directions ( Figure
1.35 (a)). Such light is said to b eunp olariz ed, because it is c omp osed of man y waves with all p ossible
directions o f polariza tion . Polaroid ma terials —which w ere in vente d by the f ounder o f the P olaroid C orporation ,
Edwin Land—act as a p olarizing slit f or light , allo wing only p olariza tion in one direction to p ass through .
Polarizing filters are c omp osed of long molecules aligne d in one direction . If w e think o f the molecules as
man y slits , analog ous to those f or the oscilla ting rop es, we can unders tand wh y only light with a sp ecific
polariza tion c an g et through . The axis o f a p olarizing filter is the direction along which the filter p asses the
electric field o f an EM w ave.
Figur e1.35 The slender arr ow represents a r ay of unpolariz ed light. The bold arr ows represent the dir ection o f polarization o f the
individual w aves composing the r ay. (a) If the light is unpolariz ed, the arr ows point in al l directions . (b) A polarizing fil ter has a polarization
axis that acts as a slit pas sing thr ough electric fields par allel to its dir ection. The dir ection o f polarization o f an EM w ave is defined t o be the
direction o f its electric field.
Figure 1.36 shows the eff ect o f two polarizing filters on originally unp olariz ed light . The firs t filter p olariz es the
light along its axis . When the ax es o f the firs t and sec ond filters are aligne d (p arallel), then all o f the p olariz ed
light p assed by the firs t filter is also p assed by the sec ond filter . If the sec ond p olarizing filter is rota ted, only
the c omp onent o f the light p arallel to the sec ond filter ’s axis is p assed. When the ax es are p erpendicular , no
light is p assed by the sec ond filter .32 1 • The Natur e of Light
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Figur e1.36 The eff ect o f rotating tw o polarizing fil ters, wher e the firs t polariz es the light. (a) Al l of the polariz ed light is pas sed b y the
second polarizing fil ter, because its axis is par allel to the firs t. (b) As the sec ond fil ter is r otat ed, onl y par t of the light is pas sed. (c) When the
second fil ter is perpendicular t o the firs t, no light is pas sed. (d) In this phot ograph, a polarizing fil ter is plac ed abo ve tw o others . Its axis is
perpendicular t o the fil ter on the right (dark ar ea) and par allel to the fil ter on the left (light er ar ea). (cr edit d: modification o f work b y P.P.
Urone)
Only the c omp onent o f the EM w ave parallel to the axis o f a filter is p assed. Let us c all the angle b etween the
direction o f polariza tion and the axis o f a filter . If the electric field has an amplitude E, then the transmit ted
part of the w ave has an amplitude (Figure 1.37 ). Sinc e the intensity o f a w ave is prop ortional to its
amplitude square d, the intensity Iof the transmit ted wave is rela ted to the incident w ave by
where is the intensity o f the p olariz ed wave before p assing through the filter . This e qua tion is kno wn as
Malus’ s law.
Figur e1.37 A polarizing fil ter tr ansmits onl y the c omponent o f the w ave par allel to its axis , reducing the int ensity o f any light not1.61.7 • P olariz ation 33

polariz ed par allel to its axis .
INTER ACTIVE
This Open Sourc e Ph ysics anima tion (https:/ /openstax.org/l/21ph yanielefie) helps y ou visualiz e the electric
field v ectors as light enc ounters a p olarizing filter . You c an rota te the filter —note tha t the angle displa yed is in
radians . You c an also rota te the anima tion f or 3D visualiza tion .
EXAMPLE 1.7
Calcula ting Int ensity R eduction b y a P olarizing Fil ter
Wha t angle is nee ded between the direction o f polariz ed light and the axis o f a p olarizing filter to re duce its
intensity b y ?
Strategy
When the intensity is re duced by , it is or 0.100 times its original v alue . Tha t is,
Using this inf orma tion , the e qua tion can b e use d to solv e for the nee ded angle .
Solution
Solving the e qua tion for and subs tituting with the rela tionship b etween Iand gives
Solving f or yields
Significanc e
A fairly larg e angle b etween the direction o f polariza tion and the filter axis is nee ded to re duce the intensity to
of its original v alue . This seems re asona ble b ased on e xperimenting with p olarizing films . It is
interes ting tha t at an angle o f , the intensity is re duced to of its original v alue . Note tha t is
from re ducing the intensity to z ero, and tha t at an angle o f , the intensity is re duced to of its
original v alue , giving evidenc e of symmetr y.
CHE CK Y OUR UNDER STANDING 1.6
Although w e did not sp ecify the direction in Example 1.7 , let’s sa y the p olarizing filter w as rota ted clo ckwise b y
to re duce the light intensity b y . Wha t would b e the intensity re duction if the p olarizing filter w ere
rota ted counterclo ckwise b y ?
Polariz ation b y Re flection
By no w, you c an prob ably gues s tha t polarizing sunglas ses cut the glare in reflecte d light , because tha t light is
polariz ed. You c an check this f or y ourself b y holding p olarizing sunglas ses in front o f you and rota ting them
while lo oking a t light reflecte d from w ater or glas s. As y ou rota te the sunglas ses, you will notic e the light g ets
bright and dim , but not c ompletely black . This implies the reflecte d light is p artially p olariz ed and c annot b e
completely blo cked by a p olarizing filter .
Figure 1.38 illus trates wha t happ ens when unp olariz ed light is reflecte d from a sur face. Vertically p olariz ed
light is pref erentially refracte d at the sur face, so the reflecte d light is left more horiz ontally p olariz ed. The
reasons f or this phenomenon are b eyond the sc ope of this te xt, but a c onvenient mnemonic f or rememb ering
this is to ima gine the p olariza tion direction to b e lik e an arro w. Vertical polariza tion is lik e an arro w
perpendicular to the sur face and is more lik ely to s tick and not b e reflecte d. Horiz ontal p olariza tion is lik e an34 1 • The Natur e of Light
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

arro w bouncing on its side and is more lik ely to b e reflecte d. Sunglas ses with v ertical ax es thus blo ck more
reflecte d light than unp olariz ed light from other sourc es.
Figur e1.38 Polarization b y reflection. Unpolariz ed light has equal amounts o f vertical and horiz ontal polarization. Aft er int eraction with a
surface, the v ertical c omponents ar e preferential ly absorbed or r efracted, lea ving the r eflect ed light mor e horiz ontal ly polariz ed. This is akin
to arr ows striking on their sides and bouncing o ff, wher eas arr ows striking on their tips g o int o the sur face.
Sinc e the p art of the light tha t is not reflecte d is refracte d, the amount o f polariza tion dep ends on the indic es o f
refraction o f the me dia in volved. It c an b e sho wn tha t reflecte d light is c ompletely p olariz ed at an angle o f
reflection given b y
where is the me dium in which the incident and reflecte d light tra vel and is the inde x of refraction o f the
medium tha t forms the inter face tha t reflects the light . This e qua tion is kno wn as Bre wster’s lawand is
kno wn as Bre wster’s angle , name d after the nineteenth-c entur y Sc ottish ph ysicis t who disc overed them .
INTER ACTIVE
This Open Sourc e Ph ysics anima tion (https:/ /openstax.org/l/21ph yaniincref )shows incident , reflecte d, and
refracte d light as ra ys and EM w aves. Try rota ting the anima tion f or 3D visualiza tion and also chang e the angle
of incidenc e. Near Brew ster’s angle , the reflecte d light b ecomes highly p olariz ed.
EXAMPLE 1.8
Calcula ting P olariza tion b y Reflection
(a) A t wha t angle will light tra veling in air b e completely p olariz ed horiz ontally when reflecte d from w ater? ( b)
From glas s?
Strategy
All we nee d to solv e these problems are the indic es o f refraction . Air has water has and
crown glas s has The e qua tion can b e directly applie d to find in each c ase.1.71.7 • P olariz ation 35

Solution
a.Putting the kno wn quantities into the e qua tion
gives
Solving f or the angle yields
b.Similarly , for cro wn glas s and air ,
Thus ,
Significanc e
Light reflecte d at these angles c ould b e completely blo cked by a g ood polarizing filter held with its axis v ertical.
Brew ster’s angle f or w ater and air are similar to those f or glas s and air , so tha t sunglas ses are e qually eff ectiv e
for light reflecte d from either w ater or glas s under similar circums tanc es. Light tha t is not reflecte d is
refracte d into these me dia. Theref ore, at an incident angle e qual to Brew ster’s angle , the refracte d light is
slightly p olariz ed vertically. It is not c ompletely p olariz ed vertically, because only a small fraction o f the
incident light is reflecte d, so a signific ant amount o f horiz ontally p olariz ed light is refracte d.
CHE CK Y OUR UNDER STANDING 1.7
Wha t happ ens a t Brew ster’s angle if the original incident light is alre ady vertically p olariz ed?
Atomic Explanation o f Polarizing Filter s
Polarizing filters ha ve a p olariza tion axis tha t acts as a slit . This slit p asses EM w aves (o ften visible light) tha t
have an electric field p arallel to the axis . This is ac complishe d with long molecules aligne d perpendicular to
the axis , as sho wn in Figure 1.39 .
Figur e1.39 Long molecules ar e aligned perpendicular t o the axis o f a polarizing fil ter. In an EM w ave, the c omponent o f the electric field
perpendicular t o these molecules pas ses thr ough the fil ter, wher eas the c omponent par allel to the molecules is absorbed.36 1 • The Natur e of Light
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Figure 1.40 illus trates ho w the c omp onent o f the electric field p arallel to the long molecules is a bsorb ed. An
EM w ave is c omp osed of oscilla ting electric and ma gnetic fields . The electric field is s trong c omp ared with the
magnetic field and is more eff ectiv e in e xerting f orce on charg es in the molecules . The mos t affecte d charg ed
particles are the electrons , sinc e electron mas ses are small . If an electron is f orced to oscilla te, it c an a bsorb
energ y from the EM w ave. This re duces the field in the w ave and , henc e, reduces its intensity . In long
molecules , electrons c an more e asily oscilla te p arallel to the molecule than in the p erpendicular direction . The
electrons are b ound to the molecule and are more res tricte d in their mo vement p erpendicular to the molecule .
Thus , the electrons c an a bsorb EM w aves tha t ha ve a c omp onent o f their electric field p arallel to the molecule .
The electrons are much les s resp onsiv e to electric fields p erpendicular to the molecule and allo w these fields
to p ass. Thus , the axis o f the p olarizing filter is p erpendicular to the length o f the molecule .
Figur e1.40 Diagr am o f an electr on in a long molecule oscil lating par allel to the molecule . The oscil lation o f the electr on absorbs ener gy
and r educ es the int ensity o f the c omponent o f the EM w ave that is par allel to the molecule .
Polariz ation b y Scat tering
If you hold y our p olarizing sunglas ses in front o f you and rota te them while lo oking a t blue sky , you will see the
sky g et bright and dim . This is a cle ar indic ation tha t light sc attere d by air is p artially p olariz ed.Figure 1.41
helps illus trate ho w this happ ens. Sinc e light is a trans verse EM w ave, it vibra tes the electrons o f air molecules
perpendicular to the direction tha t it is tra veling . The electrons then radia te lik e small antennae . Sinc e the y
are oscilla ting p erpendicular to the direction o f the light ra y, the y pro duce EM radia tion tha t is p olariz ed
perpendicular to the direction o f the ra y. When viewing the light along a line p erpendicular to the original ra y,
as in the figure , there c an b e no p olariza tion in the sc attere d light p arallel to the original ra y, because tha t
would re quire the original ra y to b e a longitudinal w ave. Along other directions , a c omp onent o f the other
polariza tion c an b e projecte d along the line o f sight , and the sc attere d light is only p artially p olariz ed.
Furthermore , multiple sc attering c an bring light to y our e yes from other directions and c an c ontain diff erent
polariza tions .1.7 • P olariz ation 37

Figur e1.41 Polarization b y scat tering . Unpolariz ed light scat tering fr om air molecules shak es their electr ons perpendicular t o the
direction o f the original r ay. The scat tered light ther efore has a polarization perpendicular t o the original dir ection and none par allel to the
original dir ection.
Photographs o f the sky c an b e dark ened by polarizing filters , a trick use d by man y photographers to mak e
clouds brighter b y contras t. Scattering from other p articles , such as smok e or dus t, can also p olariz e light .
Detecting p olariza tion in sc attere d EM w aves c an b e a useful analytic al to ol in determining the sc attering
sourc e.
A rang e of optic al eff ects are use d in sunglas ses. Besides b eing p olarizing , sunglas ses ma y ha ve colore d
pigments emb edde d in them , where as others use either a nonreflectiv e or reflectiv e coating . A rec ent
development is photo chromic lenses , which dark en in the sunlight and b ecome cle ar indo ors. Photo chromic
lenses are emb edde d with org anic micro crystalline molecules tha t chang e their prop erties when e xposed to
UV in sunlight , but b ecome cle ar in ar tificial lighting with no UV .
Liquid Cr ystals and Other P olariz ation Ef fects in Materials
Although y ou are undoubte dly a ware o fliquid cr ystal displa ys (LCDs) found in w atches , calcula tors , computer
screens , cellphones , flat screen televisions , and man y other plac es, you ma y not b e aware tha t the y are b ased
on p olariza tion . Liquid cr ystals are so name d because their molecules c an b e aligne d ev en though the y are in a
liquid . Liquid cr ystals ha ve the prop erty tha t the y can rota te the p olariza tion o f light p assing through them b y
. Furthermore , this prop erty can b e turne d off by the applic ation o f a v olta ge, as illus trated in Figure 1.42 . It
is possible to manipula te this characteris tic quickly and in small , well-define d regions to cre ate the c ontras t
patterns w e see in so man y LCD devic es.
In fla t screen L CD televisions , a larg e light is g enera ted at the b ack o f the T V. The light tra vels to the front
screen through millions o f tin y units c alled pix els (picture elements). One o f these is sho wn in Figure 1.42 (a)
and ( b). Each unit has three c ells, with re d, blue , or green filters , each c ontrolle d indep endently . When the
volta ge acros s a liquid cr ystal is s witche d off, the liquid cr ystal p asses the light through the p articular filter . We
can v ary the picture c ontras t by varying the s trength o f the v olta ge applie d to the liquid cr ystal.38 1 • The Natur e of Light
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Figur e1.42 (a) P olariz ed light is r otat ed by a liquid cr ystal and then pas sed b y a polarizing fil ter that has its axis perpendicular t o the
direction o f the original polarization. (b) When a v oltage is applied t o the liquid cr ystal, the polariz ed light is not r otat ed and is block ed b y
the fil ter, making the r egion dark in c omparison with its surr oundings . (c) L CDs can be made c olor specific, smal l, and fas t enough t o use in
laptop c omput ers and T Vs. (credit c: modification o f work b y Jane Whitne y)
Man y cr ystals and solutions rota te the plane o f polariza tion o f light p assing through them . Such subs tanc es are
said to b eoptically act ive. Examples include sug ar w ater, insulin , and c ollagen (Figure 1.43 ). In addition to
dep ending on the typ e of subs tanc e, the amount and direction o f rota tion dep end on sev eral other factors .
Among these is the c oncentra tion o f the subs tanc e, the dis tanc e the light tra vels through it , and the w avelength
of light . Optic al activity is due to the as ymmetric al shap e of molecules in the subs tanc e, such as b eing helic al.
Measurements o f the rota tion o f polariz ed light p assing through subs tanc es c an thus b e use d to me asure
concentra tions , a s tandard technique f or sug ars. It c an also giv e inf orma tion on the shap es o f molecules , such
as proteins , and factors tha t affect their shap es, such as temp erature and pH.
Figur e1.43 Optical activity is the ability o f some subs tanc es to rotat e the plane o f polarization o f light pas sing thr ough them. The r otation
is det ected with a polarizing fil ter or anal yzer.
Glas s and plas tic b ecome optic ally activ e when s tres sed: the gre ater the s tres s, the gre ater the eff ect.Optic al
stres s analy sison c omplic ated shap es c an b e performe d by making plas tic mo dels o f them and obser ving
them through cros sed filters , as seen in Figure 1.44 . It is app arent tha t the eff ect dep ends on w avelength as1.7 • P olariz ation 39

well as s tres s. The w avelength dep endenc e is sometimes also use d for ar tistic purp oses .
Figur e1.44 Optical s tress anal ysis o f a plas tic lens plac ed betw een cr ossed polariz ers. (credit: “Inf opro”/Wikimedia Commons)
Another interes ting phenomenon as sociated with p olariz ed light is the a bility o f some cr ystals to split an
unp olariz ed beam o f light into tw o polariz ed beams . This o ccurs b ecause the cr ystal has one v alue f or the
inde x of refraction o f polariz ed light but a diff erent v alue f or the inde x of refraction o f light p olariz ed in the
perpendicular direction , so tha t each c omp onent has its o wn angle o f refraction . Such cr ystals are said to b e
birefring ent, and , when aligne d prop erly , two perpendicularly p olariz ed beams will emerg e from the cr ystal
(Figure 1.45 ). Birefring ent cr ystals c an b e use d to pro duce polariz ed beams from unp olariz ed light . Some
birefring ent ma terials pref erentially a bsorb one o f the p olariza tions . These ma terials are c alled dichroic and
can pro duce polariza tion b y this pref erential a bsorption . This is fundamentally ho w polarizing filters and
other p olariz ers w ork.
Figur e1.45 Birefring ent mat erials , such as the c ommon miner al calcit e, split unpolariz ed beams o f light int o tw o with tw o diff erent v alues
of inde x of refraction.40 1 • The Natur e of Light
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

CHAP TER RE VIEW
Key Terms
birefring ent refers to cr ystals tha t split an
unp olariz ed beam o f light into tw o beams
Bre wster’s angle angle o f incidenc e at which the
reflecte d light is c ompletely p olariz ed
Bre wster’s law , where is the
medium in which the incident and reflecte d light
travel and is the inde x of refraction o f the
medium tha t forms the inter face tha t reflects the
light
corner reflector object c onsis ting o f two (or three)
mutually p erpendicular reflecting sur faces, so
that the light tha t enters is reflecte d back e xactly
parallel to the direction from which it c ame
crit ical angle incident angle tha t pro duces an
angle o f refraction o f
direct ion of p olarizat ion direction p arallel to the
electric field f or EM w aves
disp ersion spre ading o f light into its sp ectr um o f
wavelengths
fiber opt ics field o f study o f the transmis sion o f
light do wn fib ers o f plas tic or glas s, applying the
principle o f total internal reflection
geometric opt ics part of optics de aling with the ra y
aspect o f light
horiz ontally p olariz edoscilla tions are in a
horiz ontal plane
Huy gens’ s principle every point on a w ave front is
a sourc e of wavelets tha t spre ad out in the
forward direction a t the same sp eed as the w ave
itself; the new w ave front is a plane tang ent to all
of the w aveletsinde x of refract ion for a ma terial , the ra tio o f the
speed of light in a v acuum to tha t in a ma terial
law of reflect ion angle o f reflection e quals the
angle o f incidenc e
law of refract ion when a light ra y cros ses from
one me dium to another , it chang es direction b y
an amount tha t dep ends on the inde x of
refraction o f each me dium and the sines o f the
angle o f incidenc e and angle o f refraction
Malus’ s law where is the intensity o f the
polariz ed wave before p assing through the filter
optically act ivesubs tanc es tha t rota te the plane o f
polariza tion o f light p assing through them
polarizat ion attribute tha t wave oscilla tions ha ve a
definite direction rela tive to the direction o f
prop agation o f the w ave
polariz edrefers to w aves ha ving the electric and
magnetic field oscilla tions in a definite direction
raystraight line tha t origina tes a t some p oint
refract ion changing o f a light ra y’s direction when
it passes through v aria tions in ma tter
total internal reflect ion phenomenon a t the
boundar y between tw o me dia such tha t all the
light is reflecte d and no refraction o ccurs
unp olariz edrefers to w aves tha t are randomly
polariz ed
vertically p olariz edoscilla tions are in a v ertical
plane
wave opt ics part of optics de aling with the w ave
aspect o f light
Key Equations
Speed of light
Inde x of refraction
Law of reflection
Law of refraction (Snell ’s law)
Critic al angle
Malus’ s law
Brew ster’s law1 • Chap ter Re view 41

Summar y
1.1The P ropagation o f Light
•The sp eed of light in a v acuum is
.
•The inde x of refraction o f a ma terial is
where vis the sp eed of light in a ma terial and c
is the sp eed of light in a v acuum .
•The ra y mo del o f light describ es the p ath o f light
as s traight lines . The p art of optics de aling with
the ra y asp ect o f light is c alled geometric optics .
•Light c an tra vel in three w ays from a sourc e to
another lo cation: (1) directly from the sourc e
through empty sp ace; (2) through v arious
media; and (3) a fter b eing reflecte d from a
mirror .
1.2The L aw o f Reflection
•When a light ra y strikes a smo oth sur face, the
angle o f reflection e quals the angle o f incidenc e.
•A mirror has a smo oth sur face and reflects light
at specific angles .
•Light is diffuse d when it reflects from a rough
surface.
1.3Refraction
•The chang e of a light ra y’s direction when it
passes through v aria tions in ma tter is c alled
refraction .
•The la w of refraction , also c alled Snell ’s law,
rela tes the indic es o f refraction f or tw o me dia a t
an inter face to the chang e in angle o f a light ra y
passing through tha t inter face.
1.4Total Internal Re flection
•The incident angle tha t pro duces an angle o f
refraction o f is called the critic al angle .
•Total internal reflection is a phenomenon tha t
occurs a t the b oundar y between tw o me dia,
such tha t if the incident angle in the firs t
medium is gre ater than the critic al angle , then
all the light is reflecte d back into tha t me dium .
•Fiber optics in volves the transmis sion o f light
down fib ers o f plas tic or glas s, applying the
principle o f total internal reflection .
•Cladding prev ents light from b eing transmit ted
between fib ers in a bundle .
•Diamonds sp arkle due to total internal
reflection c ouple d with a larg e inde x of
refraction .
1.5Disper sion
•The spre ading o f white light into its fullspectr um o f wavelengths is c alled disp ersion .
•Rainb ows are pro duced by a c ombina tion o f
refraction and reflection , and in volve the
disp ersion o f sunlight into a c ontinuous
distribution o f colors .
•Disp ersion pro duces b eautiful rainb ows but also
causes problems in c ertain optic al systems .
1.6Huygens ’s Principle
•According to Huy gens’ s principle , every point on
a wave front is a sourc e of wavelets tha t spre ad
out in the f orward direction a t the same sp eed
as the w ave itself. The new w ave front is tang ent
to all o f the w avelets .
•A mirror reflects an inc oming w ave at an angle
equal to the incident angle , verifying the la w of
reflection .
•The la w of refraction c an b e explaine d by
applying Huy gens’ s principle to a w ave front
passing from one me dium to another .
•The b ending o f a w ave around the e dges o f an
opening or an obs tacle is c alled diffraction .
1.7Polariz ation
•Polariza tion is the a ttribute tha t wave
oscilla tions ha ve a definite direction rela tive to
the direction o f prop agation o f the w ave. The
direction o f polariza tion is define d to b e the
direction p arallel to the electric field o f the EM
wave.
•Unp olariz ed light is c omp osed of man y ra ys
having random p olariza tion directions .
•Unp olariz ed light c an b e polariz ed by passing it
through a p olarizing filter or other p olarizing
material . The pro cess of polarizing light
decre ases its intensity b y a factor o f 2.
•The intensity ,I, of polariz ed light a fter p assing
through a p olarizing filter is ,
where is the incident intensity and is the
angle b etween the direction o f polariza tion and
the axis o f the filter .
•Polariza tion is also pro duced by reflection .
•Brew ster’s law states tha t reflecte d light is
completely p olariz ed at the angle o f reflection
, kno wn as Brew ster’s angle .
•Polariza tion c an also b e pro duced by sc attering .
•Several typ es o f optic ally activ e subs tanc es
rota te the direction o f polariza tion o f light
passing through them .42 1 • Chap ter Re view
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Concep tual Ques tions
1.1The P ropagation o f Light
1.Under wha t conditions c an light b e mo dele d lik e
a ra y? Lik e a w ave?
2.Why is the inde x of refraction alw ays gre ater than
or e qual to 1?
3.Does the fact tha t the light flash from lightning
reaches y ou b efore its sound pro ve tha t the sp eed
of light is e xtremely larg e or simply tha t it is
greater than the sp eed of sound? Discus s ho w
you c ould use this eff ect to g et an es tima te of the
speed of light .
4.Specula te as to wha t ph ysical pro cess might b e
resp onsible f or light tra veling more slo wly in a
medium than in a v acuum .
1.2The L aw o f Reflection
5.Using the la w of reflection , explain ho w powder
takes the shine o ff of a p erson ’s nose . Wha t is the
name o f the optic al eff ect?
1.3Refraction
6.Diffusion b y reflection from a rough sur face is
describ ed in this chapter . Light c an also b e
diffuse d by refraction . Describ e ho w this o ccurs
in a sp ecific situa tion , such as light interacting
with cr ushe d ice.
7.Will light chang e direction to ward or a way from
the p erpendicular when it g oes from air to w ater?
Water to glas s? Glas s to air?
8.Explain wh y an object in w ater alw ays app ears to
be at a depth shallo wer than it actually is?
9.Explain wh y a p erson ’s legs app ear v ery shor t
when w ading in a p ool. Justify your e xplana tion
with a ra y dia gram sho wing the p ath o f rays from
the f eet to the e ye of an obser ver who is out o f the
water.
10.Explain wh y an o ar tha t is p artially submerg ed
in w ater app ears b ent.
1.4Total Internal Re flection
11.A ring with a c olorles s gems tone is dropp ed into
water. The g ems tone b ecomes in visible when
submerg ed. Can it b e a diamond? Explain .
12.The mos t common typ e of mira ge is an illusion
that light from fara way objects is reflecte d by a
pool of water tha t is not re ally there . Mira ges are
generally obser ved in deser ts, when there is a
hot la yer o f air ne ar the ground . Giv en tha t the
refractiv e inde x of air is lo wer for air a t highertemp eratures , explain ho w mira ges c an b e
forme d.
13.How can y ou use total internal reflection to
estima te the inde x of refraction o f a me dium?
1.5Disper sion
14.Is it p ossible tha t total internal reflection pla ys a role
in rainb ows? Explain in terms o f indic es o f
refraction and angles , perhaps ref erring to tha t
shown b elow. Some o f us ha ve seen the f orma tion o f
a double rainb ow; is it ph ysically p ossible to obser ve
a triple rainb ow?
(cre dit: " Chad"/Flickr)
15.A high-quality diamond ma y be quite cle ar and
colorles s, transmit ting all visible w avelengths
with lit tle a bsorption . Explain ho w it c an
sparkle with flashes o f brilliant c olor when
illumina ted by white light .
1.6Huygens ’s Principle
16.How do w ave eff ects dep end on the siz e of the
object with which the w ave interacts? F or
example , wh y do es sound b end around the
corner o f a building while light do es not?
17.Does Huy gens’ s principle apply to all typ es o f
waves?
18.If diffraction is obser ved for some
phenomenon , it is evidenc e tha t the
phenomenon is a w ave. Do es the rev erse hold
true? Tha t is, if diffraction is not obser ved, does
that me an the phenomenon is not a w ave?
1.7Polariz ation
19.Can a sound w ave in air b e polariz ed? Explain .
20.No light p asses through tw o perfect p olarizing
filters with p erpendicular ax es. Ho wever, if a
third p olarizing filter is plac ed between the
original tw o, some light c an p ass. Wh y is this?1 • Chap ter Re view 43

Under wha t circums tanc es do es mos t of the
light p ass?
21.Explain wha t happ ens to the energ y carrie d by
light tha t it is dimme d by passing it through tw o
cros sed polarizing filters .
22.When p articles sc attering light are much
smaller than its w avelength , the amount o f
scattering is prop ortional to . Do es this me an
there is more sc attering f or small than larg e
? Ho w do es this rela te to the fact tha t the sky is
blue?
23.Using the inf orma tion giv en in the prec eding
ques tion , explain wh y sunsets are re d.24.When light is reflecte d at Brew ster’s angle from
a smo oth sur face, it is polariz ed parallel
to the sur face. Part of the light will b e refracte d
into the sur face. Describ e ho w you w ould do an
experiment to determine the p olariza tion o f the
refracte d light . Wha t direction w ould y ou e xpect
the p olariza tion to ha ve and w ould y ou e xpect it
to b e ?
25.If you lie on a b each lo oking a t the w ater with
your he ad tipp ed slightly sidew ays, your
polariz ed sunglas ses do not w ork v ery well. Wh y
not?
Problems
1.1The P ropagation o f Light
26.Wha t is the sp eed of light in w ater? In gly cerine?
27.Wha t is the sp eed of light in air? In cro wn glas s?
28.Calcula te the inde x of refraction f or a me dium
in which the sp eed of light is
and identif y the mos t lik ely subs tanc e based on
Table 1.1 .
29.In wha t subs tanc e in Table 1.1 is the sp eed of
light
30.There w as a major c ollision o f an as teroid with
the Mo on in me diev al times . It w as describ ed by
monks a t Canterbur y Cathedral in England as a
red glo w on and around the Mo on. Ho w long
after the as teroid hit the Mo on, which is
away, would the light firs t arriv e
on Ear th?
31.Comp onents o f some c omputers c ommunic ate
with e ach other through optic al fib ers ha ving an
inde x of refraction Wha t time in
nanosec onds is re quire d for a signal to tra vel
0.200 m through such a fib er?
32.Comp are the time it tak es for light to tra vel
1000 m on the sur face of Ear th and in outer
space.
33.How far do es light tra vel under water during a
time inter val of ?
1.2The L aw o f Reflection
34.Supp ose a man s tands in front o f a mirror as
shown b elow. His e yes are 1.65 m a bove the
floor and the top o f his he ad is 0.13 m higher .
Find the height a bove the flo or o f the top and
bottom o f the smalles t mirror in which he c an
see b oth the top o f his he ad and his f eet. Ho w is
this dis tanc e rela ted to the man ’s height?
35.Sho w tha t when light reflects from tw o mirrors
that meet e ach other a t a right angle , the
outgoing ra y is p arallel to the inc oming ra y, as
illus trated below.
36.On the Mo on’s sur face, lunar as trona uts plac ed
a corner reflector , off which a laser b eam is44 1 • Chap ter Re view
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

perio dically reflecte d. The dis tanc e to the Mo on
is calcula ted from the round-trip time . Wha t
percent c orrection is nee ded to ac count f or the
dela y in time due to the slo wing o f light in
Earth’s atmosphere? As sume the dis tanc e to the
Moon is precisely and Ear th’s
atmosphere ( which v aries in density with
altitude) is e quiv alent to a la yer 30.0 km thick
with a c onstant inde x of refraction
37.A fla t mirror is neither c onverging nor div erging . To
prove this , consider tw o ra ys origina ting from the
same p oint and div erging a t an angle (see b elow).
Sho w tha t after s triking a plane mirror , the angle
between their directions remains
1.3Refraction
Unles s other wise sp ecifie d, for problems 1 through
10, the indic es o f refraction o f glas s and w ater
should b e tak en to b e 1.50 and 1.333, resp ectiv ely.
38.A light b eam in air has an angle o f incidenc e of
at the sur face of a glas s pla te. Wha t are the
angles o f reflection and refraction?
39.A light b eam in air is incident on the sur face of
a pond , making an angle o f with resp ect to
the sur face. Wha t are the angles o f reflection
and refraction?
40.When a light ra y cros ses from w ater into glas s, it
emerg es a t an angle o f with resp ect to the
normal o f the inter face. Wha t is its angle o f
incidenc e?
41.A pencil flashlight submerg ed in w ater sends a
light b eam to ward the sur face at an angle o f
incidenc e of . Wha t is the angle o f refraction
in air?
42.Light ra ys from the Sun mak e a angle to the
vertical when seen from b elow the sur face of a
body o f water. At wha t angle a bove the horiz on
is the Sun?
43.The p ath o f a light b eam in air g oes from anangle o f incidenc e of to an angle o f
refraction o f when it enters a rectangular
block o f plas tic. Wha t is the inde x of refraction
of the plas tic?
44.A scub a div er training in a p ool lo oks a t his
instructor as sho wn b elow. Wha t angle do es the ra y
from the ins tructor ’s fac e mak e with the
perpendicular to the w ater a t the p oint where the ra y
enters? The angle b etween the ra y in the w ater and
the p erpendicular to the w ater is .
45.(a) U sing inf orma tion in the prec eding problem ,
find the height o f the ins tructor ’s he ad a bove
the w ater, noting tha t you will firs t ha ve to
calcula te the angle o f incidenc e. (b) F ind the
app arent depth o f the div er’s he ad b elow w ater
as seen b y the ins tructor .
1.4Total Internal Re flection
46.Verify tha t the critic al angle f or light g oing from
water to air is , as discus sed at the end o f
Example 1.4 , reg arding the critic al angle f or
light tra veling in a p olystyrene (a typ e of plas tic)
pipe surrounde d by air .
47.(a) A t the end o fExample 1.4 , it w as s tated tha t
the critic al angle f or light g oing from diamond
to air is Verify this . (b) Wha t is the critic al
angle f or light g oing from zirc on to air?
48.An optic al fib er uses flint glas s clad with cro wn
glas s. Wha t is the critic al angle?
49.At wha t minimum angle will y ou g et total
internal reflection o f light tra veling in w ater and
reflecte d from ic e?
50.Supp ose y ou are using total internal reflection
to mak e an efficient c orner reflector . If there is
air outside and the incident angle is , wha t1 • Chap ter Re view 45

mus t be the minimum inde x of refraction o f the
material from which the reflector is made?
51.You c an determine the inde x of refraction o f a
subs tanc e by determining its critic al angle . (a)
Wha t is the inde x of refraction o f a subs tanc e
that has a critic al angle o f when
submerg ed in w ater? Wha t is the subs tanc e,
based on Table 1.1 ? (b) Wha t would the critic al
angle b e for this subs tanc e in air?
52.A ra y of light , emit ted beneath the sur face of an
unkno wn liquid with air a bove it, underg oes total
internal reflection as sho wn b elow. Wha t is the
inde x of refraction f or the liquid and its lik ely
identific ation?
53.Light ra ys fall normally on the v ertical sur face
of the glas s prism shown b elow. (a)
Wha t is the larg est value f or such tha t the ra y
is totally reflecte d at the slante d fac e? (b) R epeat
the c alcula tion o f part (a) if the prism is
immerse d in w ater.
1.5Disper sion
54.(a) Wha t is the ra tio o f the sp eed of red light to
violet light in diamond , based on Table 1.2 ? (b)
Wha t is this ra tio in p olystyrene? (c) Which ismore disp ersiv e?
55.A beam o f white light g oes from air into w ater a t
an incident angle o f . At wha t angles are
the re d (660 nm) and violet (410 nm) p arts of
the light refracte d?
56.By ho w much do the critic al angles f or re d (660
nm) and violet (410 nm) light diff er in a
diamond surrounde d by air?
57.(a) A narro w beam o f light c ontaining y ellow
(580 nm) and green (550 nm) w avelengths g oes
from p olystyrene to air , striking the sur face at a
incident angle . Wha t is the angle b etween
the c olors when the y emerg e? (b) Ho w far w ould
they ha ve to tra vel to b e sep arated by 1.00 mm?
58.A parallel b eam o f light c ontaining orang e (610
nm) and violet (410 nm) w avelengths g oes from
fuse d quar tz to w ater, striking the sur face
between them a t a incident angle . Wha t is
the angle b etween the tw o colors in w ater?
59.A ra y of 610-nm light g oes from air into fuse d
quar tz at an incident angle o f . At wha t
incident angle mus t 470 nm light enter flint
glas s to ha ve the same angle o f refraction?
60.A narro w beam o f light c ontaining re d (660 nm)
and blue (470 nm) w avelengths tra vels from air
through a 1.00- cm-thick fla t piec e of cro wn
glas s and b ack to air a gain. The b eam s trikes a t
a incident angle . (a) A t wha t angles do the
two colors emerg e? (b) B y wha t dis tanc e are the
red and blue sep arated when the y emerg e?
61.A narro w beam o f white light enters a prism
made o f cro wn glas s at a incident angle , as
shown b elow. At wha t angles , and , do the
red (660 nm) and violet (410 nm) c omp onents
of the light emerg e from the prism?
1.7Polariz ation
62.Wha t angle is nee ded between the direction o f
polariz ed light and the axis o f a p olarizing filter
to cut its intensity in half ?
63.The angle b etween the ax es o f two polarizing
filters is . By ho w much do es the sec ond
filter re duce the intensity o f the light c oming
through the firs t?46 1 • Chap ter Re view
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

64.Two polarizing sheets and are plac ed
together with their transmis sion ax es oriente d
at an angle to each other . Wha t is when only
of the maximum transmit ted light intensity
passes through them?
65.Supp ose tha t in the prec eding problem the light
incident on is unp olariz ed. At the
determine d value o f, wha t fraction o f the
incident light p asses through the c ombina tion?
66.If you ha ve completely p olariz ed light o f
intensity , wha t will its intensity b e
after p assing through a p olarizing filter with its
axis a t an angle to the light ’s polariza tion
direction?
67.Wha t angle w ould the axis o f a p olarizing filter
need to mak e with the direction o f polariz ed
light o f intensity to re duce the
intensity to ?
68.At the end o fExample 1.7 , it w as s tated tha t the
intensity o f polariz ed light is re duced to
of its original v alue b y passing through a
polarizing filter with its axis a t an angle o f
to the direction o f polariza tion . Verify this
statement .
69.Sho w tha t if y ou ha ve three p olarizing filters ,
with the sec ond a t an angle o f to the firs t
and the third a t an angle o f to the firs t, the
intensity o f light p assed by the firs t will b e
reduced to of its v alue . (This is in
contras t to ha ving only the firs t and third , which
reduces the intensity to z ero, so tha t placing thesecond b etween them incre ases the intensity o f
the transmit ted light .)
70.Three p olarizing sheets are plac ed tog ether
such tha t the transmis sion axis o f the sec ond
sheet is oriente d at to the axis o f the firs t,
where as the transmis sion axis o f the third sheet
is oriente d at (in the same sense) to the
axis o f the firs t. Wha t fraction o f the intensity o f
an incident unp olariz ed beam is transmit ted by
the c ombina tion?
71.In order to rota te the p olariza tion axis o f a b eam
of line arly p olariz ed light b y , a s tudent
plac es sheets and with their transmis sion
axes a t and , resp ectiv ely, to the
beam’s axis o f polariza tion . (a) Wha t fraction o f
the incident light p asses through and ( b)
through the c ombina tion? (c) R epeat your
calcula tions f or p art (b) for transmis sion-axis
angles o f and , resp ectiv ely.
72.It is f ound tha t when light tra veling in w ater
falls on a plas tic blo ck, Brew ster’s angle is .
Wha t is the refractiv e inde x of the plas tic?
73.At wha t angle will light reflecte d from diamond
be completely p olariz ed?
74.Wha t is Brew ster’s angle f or light tra veling in
water tha t is reflecte d from cro wn glas s?
75.A scub a div er sees light reflecte d from the
water’s sur face. At wha t angle rela tive to the
water’s sur face will this light b e completely
polariz ed?
Additional P roblems
76.From his me asurements , Roemer es tima ted
that it to ok 22 min f or light to tra vel a dis tanc e
equal to the diameter o f Ear th’s orbit around the
Sun . (a) U se this es tima te along with the kno wn
diameter o f Ear th’s orbit to obtain a rough v alue
of the sp eed of light . (b) Light actually tak es 16.5
min to tra vel this dis tanc e. Use this time to
calcula te the sp eed of light .
77.Cornu p erforme d Fizeau’s me asurement o f the
speed of light using a wheel o f diameter 4.00 cm
that containe d 180 teeth . The dis tanc e from the
wheel to the mirror w as 22.9 km . Assuming he
measure d the sp eed of light ac cura tely, wha t
was the angular v elocity o f the wheel?78.Supp ose y ou ha ve an unkno wn cle ar subs tanc e
immerse d in w ater, and y ou wish to identif y it
by finding its inde x of refraction . You arrang e to
have a b eam o f light enter it a t an angle o f ,
and y ou obser ve the angle o f refraction to b e
. Wha t is the inde x of refraction o f the
subs tanc e and its lik ely identity?1 • Chap ter Re view 47

79.Sho wn b elow is a ra y of light g oing from air through
crown glas s into w ater, such as g oing into a fish tank .
Calcula te the amount the ra y is displac ed by the
glas s given tha t the incident angle is and
the glas s is 1.00 cm thick .
80.Considering the previous problem , sho w tha t
is the same as it w ould b e if the sec ond me dium
were not present .
81.At wha t angle is light inside cro wn glas s
completely p olariz ed when reflecte d from w ater,
as in a fish tank?
82.Light reflecte d at from a windo w is
completely p olariz ed. Wha t is the windo w’s
inde x of refraction and the lik ely subs tanc e of
which it is made?
83.(a) Light reflecte d at from a g ems tone in a
ring is c ompletely p olariz ed. Can the g em b e a
diamond? ( b) A t wha t angle w ould the light b e
completely p olariz ed if the g em w as in w ater?
84.If is Brew ster’s angle f or light reflecte d from
the top o f an inter face between tw o subs tanc es,
and is Brew ster’s angle f or light reflecte d
from b elow, pro ve tha t .85.Unre asonable results Supp ose light tra vels
from w ater to another subs tanc e, with an angle
of incidenc e of and an angle o f refraction
of . (a) Wha t is the inde x of refraction o f the
other subs tanc e? (b) Wha t is unre asona ble
about this result? (c) Which as sumptions are
unre asona ble or inc onsis tent?
86.Unre asonable results Light tra veling from
water to a g ems tone s trikes the sur face at an
angle o f and has an angle o f refraction o f
. (a) Wha t is the sp eed of light in the
gems tone? ( b) Wha t is unre asona ble a bout this
result? (c) Which as sumptions are unre asona ble
or inc onsis tent?
87.If a p olarizing filter re duces the intensity o f
polariz ed light to of its original v alue , by
how much are the electric and ma gnetic fields
reduced?
88.Supp ose y ou put on tw o pairs o f polarizing
sunglas ses with their ax es a t an angle o f .
How much long er will it tak e the light to dep osit
a giv en amount o f energ y in y our e ye comp ared
with a single p air o f sunglas ses? As sume the
lenses are cle ar e xcept f or their p olarizing
characteris tics.
89.(a) On a da y when the intensity o f sunlight is
, a circular lens 0.200 m in
diameter f ocuses light onto w ater in a black
beaker. Tw o polarizing sheets o f plas tic are
plac ed in front o f the lens with their ax es a t an
angle o f . Assuming the sunlight is
unp olariz ed and the p olariz ers are
efficient , wha t is the initial ra te of he ating o f the
water in , assuming it is absorb ed?
The aluminum b eaker has a mas s of 30.0 grams
and c ontains 250 grams o f water. (b) Do the
polarizing filters g et hot? Explain .
Challenge P roblems
90.Light sho ws staged with lasers use mo ving
mirrors to s wing b eams and cre ate color ful
effects . Sho w tha t a light ra y reflecte d from a
mirror chang es direction b y when the mirror
is rota ted by an angle .48 1 • Chap ter Re view
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

91.Consider sunlight entering Ear th’s atmosphere
at sunrise and sunset —tha t is, at a
incident angle . Taking the b oundar y between
nearly empty sp ace and the a tmosphere to b e
sudden , calcula te the angle o f refraction f or
sunlight . This lengthens the time the Sun
app ears to b e above the horiz on, both a t sunrise
and sunset . Now construct a problem in which
you determine the angle o f refraction f or
different mo dels o f the a tmosphere , such as
various la yers o f varying density . Your
instructor ma y wish to guide y ou on the lev el of
comple xity to c onsider and on ho w the inde x of
refraction v aries with air density .
92.A light ra y entering an optic al fib er surrounde d by
air is firs t refracte d and then reflecte d as sho wn
below. Sho w tha t if the fib er is made from cro wn
glas s, any incident ra y will b e totally internally
reflecte d.
93.A light ra y falls on the left fac e of a prism (see b elow)
at the angle o f incidenc efor which the emerging
beam has an angle o f refraction at the right fac e.
Sho w tha t the inde x of refraction nof the glas s prism
is giv en b y
where is the v ertex angle o f the prism and is the
angle through which the b eam has b een devia ted. If
and the b ase angles o f the prism are e ach
wha t isn?
94.If the ap ex angle in the previous problem is
and , wha t is the v alue o f?
95.The light incident on p olarizing sheet is
line arly p olariz ed at an angle o f with
resp ect to the transmis sion axis o f . Sheet
is plac ed so tha t its axis is p arallel to the
polariza tion axis o f the incident light , tha t is,
also a t with resp ect to . (a) Wha t
fraction o f the incident light p asses through ?
(b) Wha t fraction o f the incident light is p assed
by the c ombina tion? (c) B y rota ting , a
maximum in transmit ted intensity is obtaine d.
Wha t is the ra tio o f this maximum intensity to
the intensity o f transmit ted light when is at
with resp ect to ?
96.Prove tha t ifIis the intensity o f light
transmit ted by tw o polarizing filters with ax es a t
an angle and is the intensity when the ax es
are a t an angle then the
original intensity . (Hint: Use the trig onometric
identities and1 • Chap ter Re view 49

50 1 • Chap ter Re view
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

INTR ODUCTIONCHAP TER 2
Geometric Op tics and Imag e
Formation
2.1Images F ormed b y Plane Mirr ors
2.2Spherical Mirr ors
2.3Images F ormed b y Re fraction
2.4Thin L enses
2.5The Ey e
2.6The C amer a
2.7The Simple Magnifier
2.8Microscopes and T elescopes
This chapter intro duces the major ide as o f geometric optics , which describ e the f orma tion
Figur e2.1 Cloud Gat eis a public sculp ture by Anish K apoor locat ed in Mil lennium P ark in Chicag o. Its s tainles s
steel plat es reflect and dis tort imag es ar ound it, including the Chicag o skyline . Dedicat ed in 2006, it has bec ome a
popular t ouris t attraction, il lustrating ho w ar t can use the principles o f physical op tics t o startle and ent ertain.
(credit: modification o f work b y Dhilung Kir at)
Chap ter Outline

of ima ges due to reflection and refraction . It is c alled “geometric” optics b ecause the ima ges c an b e
characteriz ed using g eometric c onstructions , such as ra y dia grams . We ha ve seen tha t visible light is an
electroma gnetic w ave; ho wever, its w ave na ture b ecomes evident only when light interacts with objects with
dimensions c omp arable to the w avelength (a bout 500 nm f or visible light). Theref ore, the la ws of geometric
optics only apply to light interacting with objects much larg er than the w avelength o f the light .
2.1Images F ormed b y Plane Mirr ors
Learning Objectiv es
By the end o f this section, y ou wil l be able t o:
•Describe ho w an image is f ormed b y a plane mirr or.
•Distinguish be tween r eal and vir tual images .
•Find the location and char acteriz e the orientation o f an image cr eated b y a plane mirr or.
You only ha ve to lo ok as far as the ne ares t bathro om to find an e xample o f an ima ge forme d by a mirror . Ima ges
in a plane mirror are the same siz e as the object , are lo cated behind the mirror , and are oriente d in the same
direction as the object (i .e., “upright ”).
To unders tand ho w this happ ens, consider Figure 2.2 . Tw o ra ys emerg e from p oint P, strike the mirror , and
reflect into the obser ver’s eye. Note tha t we use the la w of reflection to c onstruct the reflecte d ra ys. If the
reflecte d ra ys are e xtende d backw ard b ehind the mirror (see dashe d lines in Figure 2.2 ), the y seem to
origina te from p oint Q. This is where the ima ge of point Pis lo cated. If w e rep eat this pro cess for p oint , we
obtain its ima ge at point . You should c onvinc e yourself b y using b asic g eometr y tha t the ima ge height (the
distanc e from Qto ) is the same as the object height (the dis tanc e from Pto ). By forming ima ges o f all
points o f the object , we obtain an upright ima ge of the object b ehind the mirror .
Figur e2.2 Two light r ays originating fr om point Pon an object ar e reflect ed b y a flat mirr or int o the e ye of an obser ver. The r eflect ed rays
are ob tained b y using the la w of reflection. Ext ending these r eflect ed rays backw ard, the y seem t o come fr om point Qbehind the mirr or,
which is wher e the vir tual imag e is locat ed. R epeating this pr ocess for point gives the imag e point . The imag e height is thus the same
as the object height, the imag e is upright, and the object dis tanc e is the same as the imag e dis tanc e . (credit: modification o f work b y
Kevin Duf endach)
Notice tha t the reflecte d ra ys app ear to the obser ver to c ome directly from the ima ge behind the mirror . In
reality , these ra ys come from the p oints on the mirror where the y are reflecte d. The ima ge behind the mirror is
called avirtual ima gebecause it c annot b e projecte d onto a screen—the ra ys only app ear to origina te from a
common p oint b ehind the mirror . If y ou w alk b ehind the mirror , you c annot see the ima ge, because the ra ys do
not g o there . Ho wever, in front o f the mirror , the ra ys behave exactly as if the y come from b ehind the mirror , so
that is where the vir tual ima ge is lo cated.52 2 • Geome tric Op tics and Image F ormation
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Later in this chapter , we discus s real ima ges; a real ima gecan b e projecte d onto a screen b ecause the ra ys
physically g o through the ima ge. You c an c ertainly see b oth re al and vir tual ima ges. The diff erenc e is tha t a
virtual ima ge cannot b e projecte d onto a screen , where as a re al ima ge can.
Locating an Image in a Plane Mirr or
The la w of reflection tells us tha t the angle o f incidenc e is the same as the angle o f reflection . Applying this to
triangles PABand QABinFigure 2.2 and using b asic g eometr y sho ws tha t the y are c ongr uent triangles . This
means tha t the dis tanc ePBfrom the object to the mirror is the same as the dis tanc eBQfrom the mirror to the
ima ge. The object dis tanc e(denote d ) is the dis tanc e from the mirror to the object (or , more g enerally , from
the c enter o f the optic al element tha t cre ates its ima ge). Similarly , the ima ge dis tanc e(denote d ) is the
distanc e from the mirror to the ima ge (or , more g enerally , from the c enter o f the optic al element tha t cre ates
it). If w e me asure dis tanc es from the mirror , then the object and ima ge are in opp osite directions , so f or a plane
mirror , the object and ima ge dis tanc es should ha ve the opp osite signs:
An e xtende d object such as the c ontainer in Figure 2.2 can b e tre ated as a c ollection o f points , and w e can
apply the metho d above to lo cate the ima ge of each p oint on the e xtende d object , thus f orming the e xtende d
ima ge.
Multiple Images
If an object is situa ted in front o f two mirrors , you ma y see ima ges in b oth mirrors . In addition , the ima ge in the
first mirror ma y act as an object f or the sec ond mirror , so the sec ond mirror ma y form an ima ge of the ima ge. If
the mirrors are plac ed parallel to e ach other and the object is plac ed at a p oint other than the midp oint
between them , then this pro cess of ima ge-of-an-ima ge continues without end , as y ou ma y ha ve notic ed when
standing in a hallw ay with mirrors on e ach side . This is sho wn in Figure 2.3 , which sho ws three ima ges
produced by the blue object . Notice tha t each reflection rev erses front and b ack, jus t lik e pulling a right -hand
glove inside out pro duces a left -hand glo ve (this is wh y a reflection o f your right hand is a left hand). Thus , the
fronts and b acks o f ima ges 1 and 2 are b oth in verted with resp ect to the object , and the front and b ack o f ima ge
3 is in verted with resp ect to ima ge 2, which is the object f or ima ge 3.
Figur e2.3 Two par allel mirr ors can pr oduc e, in theor y, an infinit e number o f imag es o f an object plac ed o ff center betw een the mirr ors.
Three o f these imag es ar e sho wn her e. The fr ont and back o f each imag e is in verted with r espect t o its object. Not e that the c olors ar e onl y
to identif y the imag es. For normal mirr ors, the c olor o f an imag e is es sential ly the same as that o f its object.
You ma y ha ve notic ed tha t ima ge 3 is smaller than the object , where as ima ges 1 and 2 are the same siz e as the
object . The ra tio o f the ima ge height with resp ect to the object height is c alledmagnific ation. More will b e said
about ma gnific ation in the ne xt section .
Infinite reflections ma y termina te. For ins tanc e, two mirrors a t right angles f orm three ima ges, as sho wn in
part (a) o fFigure 2.4 . Ima ges 1 and 2 result from ra ys tha t reflect from only a single mirror , but ima ge 1,2 is
forme d by ra ys tha t reflect from b oth mirrors . This is sho wn in the ra y-tracing dia gram in p art (b) ofFigure 2.4 .
To find ima ge 1,2, y ou ha ve to lo ok b ehind the c orner o f the tw o mirrors .2.12.1 • Images F ormed b y Plane Mirr ors 53

Figur e2.4 Two mirr ors can pr oduc e mul tiple imag es. (a) Thr ee imag es o f a plas tic head ar e visible in the tw o mirr ors at a right angle . (b) A
single object r eflecting fr om tw o mirr ors at a right angle can pr oduc e thr ee imag es, as sho wn b y the gr een, purple , and r ed imag es.
2.2Spherical Mirr ors
Learning Objectiv es
By the end o f this section, y ou wil l be able t o:
•Describe image f ormation b y spherical mirr ors.
•Use r ay diagr ams and the mirr or equation to calculate the pr oper ties o f an image in a spherical mirr or.
The ima ge in a plane mirror has the same siz e as the object , is upright , and is the same dis tanc e behind the
mirror as the object is in front o f the mirror . Acurved mirror , on the other hand , can f orm ima ges tha t ma y be
larg er or smaller than the object and ma y form either in front o f the mirror or b ehind it . In g eneral , any cur ved
surface will f orm an ima ge, although some ima ges mak e be so dis torted as to b e unrec ogniza ble (think o f fun
house mirrors).
Because cur ved mirrors c an cre ate such a rich v ariety o f ima ges, the y are use d in man y optic al devic es tha t
find man y uses . We will c oncentra te on spheric al mirrors f or the mos t part, because the y are e asier to
manufacture than mirrors such as p arabolic mirrors and so are more c ommon .
Curved Mirr ors
We can define tw o general typ es o f spheric al mirrors . If the reflecting sur face is the outer side o f the sphere ,
the mirror is c alled aconvex mirror . If the inside sur face is the reflecting sur face, it is c alled aconc ave
mirror .
Symmetr y is one o f the major hallmarks o f man y optic al devic es, including mirrors and lenses . The s ymmetr y
axis o f such optic al elements is o ften c alled the princip al axis or optical axis . For a spheric al mirror , the optic al
axis p asses through the mirror ’s center o f cur vature and the mirror ’svertex, as sho wn in Figure 2.5 .54 2 • Geome tric Op tics and Image F ormation
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Figur e2.5 A spherical mirr or is f ormed b y cut ting out a piec e of a spher e and sil vering either the inside or outside sur face. A c onca ve
mirr or has sil vering on the int erior sur face (think “ cave”), and a c onvex mirr or has sil vering on the e xterior sur face.
Consider ra ys tha t are p arallel to the optic al axis o f a p arabolic mirror , as sho wn in p art (a) o fFigure 2.6 .
Following the la w of reflection , these ra ys are reflecte d so tha t the y converge at a p oint , called the focal p oint .
Part (b) of this figure sho ws a spheric al mirror tha t is larg e comp ared with its radius o f cur vature . For this
mirror , the reflecte d ra ys do not cros s at the same p oint , so the mirror do es not ha ve a w ell-define d focal point .
This is c alled spheric al aberra tion and results in a blurre d ima ge of an e xtende d object . Part (c) sho ws a
spheric al mirror tha t is small c omp ared to its radius o f cur vature . This mirror is a g ood appro xima tion o f a
parabolic mirror , so ra ys tha t arriv e parallel to the optic al axis are reflecte d to a w ell-define d focal point . The
distanc e along the optic al axis from the mirror to the f ocal point is c alled the focal length of the mirror .
Figur e2.6 (a) P arallel rays reflect ed fr om a par abolic mirr or cr oss at a single point cal led the f ocal point F. (b) P arallel rays reflect ed fr om
a lar ge spherical mirr or do not cr oss at a c ommon point. (c) If a spherical mirr or is smal l compar ed with its r adius o f cur vatur e, it bet ter
appr oximat es the c entr al par t of a par abolic mirr or, so par allel rays essential ly cross at a c ommon point. The dis tanc e along the op tical axis
from the mirr or to the f ocal point is the f ocal length fof the mirr or.
A convex spheric al mirror also has a f ocal point , as sho wn in Figure 2.7 . Incident ra ys parallel to the optic al
axis are reflecte d from the mirror and seem to origina te from p oint Fat focal length fbehind the mirror . Thus ,
the f ocal point is vir tual b ecause no re al ra ys actually p ass through it; the y only app ear to origina te from it .2.2 • Spherical Mirr ors 55

Figur e2.7 (a) R ays reflect ed b y a c onvex spherical mirr or: Incident r ays of light par allel to the op tical axis ar e reflect ed fr om a c onvex
spherical mirr or and seem t o originat e from a w ell-defined f ocal point at f ocal dis tanc efon the opposit e side o f the mirr or. The f ocal point is
virtual because no r eal r ays pas s thr ough it. (b) Phot ograph o f a vir tual imag e formed b y a c onvex mirr or. (credit b: modification o f work b y
Jenn y Do wning )
How do es the f ocal length o f a mirror rela te to the mirror ’s radius o f cur vature? Figure 2.8 shows a single ra y
that is reflecte d by a spheric al concave mirror . The incident ra y is p arallel to the optic al axis . The p oint a t
which the reflecte d ra y cros ses the optic al axis is the f ocal point . Note tha t all incident ra ys tha t are p arallel to
the optic al axis are reflecte d through the f ocal point —we only sho w one ra y for simplicity . We want to find ho w
the f ocal length FP(denote d byf) rela tes to the radius o f cur vature o f the mirror ,R, whose length is
. The la w of reflection tells us tha t angles OXCand CXF are the same , and b ecause the incident
ray is p arallel to the optic al axis , angles OXCand XCPare also the same . Thus , triangle CXF is an isosc eles
triangle with . If the angle is small (so tha t ; this is c alled the “ small-angle
appro xima tion ”), then or . Inser ting this into the e qua tion f or the radius R, we get
Figur e2.8 Reflection in a c onca ve mirr or. In the smal l-angle appr oximation, a r ay that is par allel to the op tical axis CPis reflect ed thr ough
the f ocal point Fof the mirr or.
In other w ords , in the small-angle appro xima tion , the f ocal length fof a c oncave spheric al mirror is half o f its
radius o f cur vature ,R:
2.256 2 • Geome tric Op tics and Image F ormation
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

In this chapter , we as sume tha t the small-angle appro ximat ion (also c alled the p araxial appro xima tion) is
always valid . In this appro xima tion , all ra ys are p araxial ra ys, which me ans tha t the y mak e a small angle with
the optic al axis and are a t a dis tanc e much les s than the radius o f cur vature from the optic al axis . In this c ase,
their angles of reflection are small angles , so .
Using Ray T racing to L ocate Images
To find the lo cation o f an ima ge forme d by a spheric al mirror , we firs t use ray tracing , which is the technique o f
drawing ra ys and using the la w of reflection to determine the reflecte d ra ys (later, for lenses , we use the la w of
refraction to determine refracte d ra ys). C ombine d with some b asic g eometr y, we can use ra y tracing to find the
focal point , the ima ge location , and other inf orma tion a bout ho w a mirror manipula tes light . In fact , we alre ady
used ra y tracing a bove to lo cate the f ocal point o f spheric al mirrors , or the ima ge dis tanc e of fla t mirrors . To
locate the ima ge of an object , you mus t locate at least two points o f the ima ge. Locating e ach p oint re quires
drawing a t least two ra ys from a p oint on the object and c onstructing their reflecte d ra ys. The p oint a t which
the reflecte d ra ys intersect , either in re al sp ace or in vir tual sp ace, is where the c orresp onding p oint o f the
ima ge is lo cated. To mak e ra y tracing e asier , we concentra te on f our “princip al” rays whose reflections are e asy
to construct.
Figure 2.9 shows a c oncave mirror and a c onvex mirror , each with an arro w-shap ed object in front o f it. These
are the objects whose ima ges w e want to lo cate by ra y tracing . To do so , we dra w ra ys from p oint Qthat is on
the object but not on the optic al axis . We cho ose to dra w our ra y from the tip o f the object . Princip al ra y 1 g oes
from p oint Qand tra vels p arallel to the optic al axis . The reflection o f this ra y mus t pass through the f ocal point ,
as discus sed above. Thus , for the c oncave mirror , the reflection o f princip al ra y 1 g oes through f ocal point F, as
shown in p art (b) of the figure . For the c onvex mirror , the b ackw ard e xtension o f the reflection o f princip al ra y
1 goes through the f ocal point (i .e., a vir tual f ocus). P rincip al ra y 2 tra vels firs t on the line g oing through the
focal point and then is reflecte d back along a line p arallel to the optic al axis . Princip al ra y 3 tra vels to ward the
center o f cur vature o f the mirror , so it s trikes the mirror a t normal incidenc e and is reflecte d back along the
line from which it c ame . Finally , princip al ra y 4 s trikes the v ertex of the mirror and is reflecte d symmetric ally
about the optic al axis .2.2 • Spherical Mirr ors 57

Figur e2.9 The f our principal r ays sho wn f or both (a) a c onca ve mirr or and (b) a c onvex mirr or. The imag e forms wher e the r ays int ersect
(for real imag es) or wher e their backw ard extensions int ersect (f or vir tual imag es).
The f our princip al ra ysintersect a t point , which is where the ima ge of point Qis lo cated. To locate p oint ,
drawing an y tw o of these principle ra ys would suffic e. We are thus free to cho ose whichev er o f the princip al
rays we desire to lo cate the ima ge. Dra wing more than tw o princip al ra ys is sometimes useful to v erify tha t the
ray tracing is c orrect .
To completely lo cate the e xtende d ima ge, we nee d to lo cate a sec ond p oint in the ima ge, so tha t we kno w ho w
the ima ge is oriente d. To do this , we trac e the princip al ra ys from the b ase o f the object . In this c ase, all f our
princip al ra ys run along the optic al axis , reflect from the mirror , and then r un b ack along the optic al axis . The
difficulty is tha t, because these ra ys are c olline ar, we cannot determine a unique p oint where the y intersect . All
we kno w is tha t the b ase o f the ima ge is on the optic al axis . Ho wever, because the mirror is s ymmetric al from
top to b ottom , it do es not chang e the v ertical orienta tion o f the object . Thus , because the object is v ertical, the
ima ge mus t be vertical. Theref ore, the ima ge of the b ase o f the object is on the optic al axis directly a bove the
ima ge of the tip , as dra wn in the figure .
For the c oncave mirror , the e xtende d ima ge in this c ase f orms b etween the f ocal point and the c enter o f
curvature o f the mirror . It is in verted with resp ect to the object , is a re al ima ge, and is smaller than the object .
Were w e to mo ve the object closer to or far ther from the mirror , the characteris tics o f the ima ge would chang e.
For e xample , we sho w, as a la ter e xercise , tha t an object plac ed between a c oncave mirror and its f ocal point
leads to a vir tual ima ge tha t is upright and larg er than the object . For the c onvex mirror , the e xtende d ima ge
forms b etween the f ocal point and the mirror . It is upright with resp ect to the object , is a vir tual ima ge, and is
smaller than the object .58 2 • Geome tric Op tics and Image F ormation
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Summar y of Ray -Tracing Rules
Ray tracing is v ery useful f or mirrors . The r ules f or ra y tracing are summariz ed here f or ref erenc e:
•A ra y tra velling p arallel to the optic al axis o f a spheric al mirror is reflecte d along a line tha t goes through
the f ocal point o f the mirror (ra y 1 in Figure 2.9 ).
•A ra y tra velling along a line tha t goes through the f ocal point o f a spheric al mirror is reflecte d along a line
parallel to the optic al axis o f the mirror (ra y 2 in Figure 2.9 ).
•A ra y tra velling along a line tha t goes through the c enter o f cur vature o f a spheric al mirror is reflecte d
back along the same line (ra y 3 in Figure 2.9 ).
•A ra y tha t strikes the v ertex of a spheric al mirror is reflecte d symmetric ally a bout the optic al axis o f the
mirror (ra y 4 in Figure 2.9 ).
We use ra y tracing to illus trate ho w ima ges are f orme d by mirrors and to obtain numeric al inf orma tion a bout
optic al prop erties o f the mirror . If w e as sume tha t a mirror is small c omp ared with its radius o f cur vature , we
can also use alg ebra and g eometr y to deriv e a mirror e qua tion , which w e do in the ne xt section . Combining ra y
tracing with the mirror e qua tion is a g ood way to analyz e mirror s ystems .
Image F ormation b y Re flection— The Mirr or Equation
For a plane mirror , we sho wed tha t the ima ge forme d has the same height and orienta tion as the object , and it
is lo cated at the same dis tanc e behind the mirror as the object is in front o f the mirror . Although the situa tion
is a bit more c omplic ated for cur ved mirrors , using g eometr y leads to simple f ormulas rela ting the object and
ima ge dis tanc es to the f ocal lengths o f concave and c onvex mirrors .
Consider the object OPshown in Figure 2.10 . The c enter o f cur vature o f the mirror is la beledCand is a
distanc eRfrom the v ertex of the mirror , as mark ed in the figure . The object and ima ge dis tanc es are la beled
and , and the object and ima ge heights are la beled and , resp ectiv ely. Bec ause the angles and are
alterna te interior angles , we kno w tha t the y ha ve the same ma gnitude . Ho wever, the y mus t diff er in sign if w e
measure angles from the optic al axis , so . An analog ous sc enario holds f or the angles and . The la w
of reflection tells us tha t the y ha ve the same ma gnitude , but their signs mus t diff er if w e me asure angles from
the optic al axis . Thus , . Taking the tang ent o f the angles and , and using the prop erty tha t
, giv es us
Figur e2.10 Imag e formed b y a c onca ve mirr or.
Similarly , taking the tang ent o fand gives2.32.2 • Spherical Mirr ors 59

Combining these tw o results giv es
After a lit tle alg ebra, this b ecomes
No appro xima tion is re quire d for this result , so it is e xact . Ho wever, as discus sed above, in the small-angle
appro xima tion , the f ocal length o f a spheric al mirror is one -half the radius o f cur vature o f the mirror , or
. Inser ting this into Equa tion 2.3 gives the mirror e qua tion :
The mirror e qua tion rela tes the ima ge and object dis tanc es to the f ocal dis tanc e and is v alid only in the small-
angle appro xima tion . Although it w as deriv ed for a c oncave mirror , it also holds f or c onvex mirrors (pro ving
this is left as an e xercise). W e can e xtend the mirror e qua tion to the c ase o f a plane mirror b y noting tha t a
plane mirror has an infinite radius o f cur vature . This me ans the f ocal point is a t infinity , so the mirror
equa tion simplifies to
which is the same as Equa tion 2.1 obtaine d earlier .
Notice tha t we ha ve been v ery careful with the signs in deriving the mirror e qua tion . For a plane mirror , the
ima ge dis tanc e has the opp osite sign o f the object dis tanc e. Also, the re al ima ge forme d by the c oncave mirror
inFigure 2.10 is on the opp osite side o f the optic al axis with resp ect to the object . In this c ase, the ima ge height
should ha ve the opp osite sign o f the object height . To keep track o f the signs o f the v arious quantities in the
mirror e qua tion , we no w intro duce a sign c onvention .
Sign conv ention f or spherical mirr ors
Using a c onsis tent sign c onvention is v ery imp ortant in g eometric optics . It as signs p ositiv e or neg ative values
for the quantities tha t characteriz e an optic al system . Unders tanding the sign c onvention allo ws you to
describ e an ima ge without c onstructing a ra y dia gram . This te xt uses the f ollowing sign c onvention:
1. The f ocal length fis positiv e for c oncave mirrors and neg ative for c onvex mirrors .
2. The ima ge dis tanc e is positiv e for re al ima ges and neg ative for vir tual ima ges.
Notice tha t rule 1 me ans tha t the radius o f cur vature o f a spheric al mirror c an b e positiv e or neg ative. Wha t
does it me an to ha ve a neg ative radius o f cur vature? This me ans simply tha t the radius o f cur vature f or a
convex mirror is define d to b e neg ative.
Image magnification
Let’s use the sign c onvention to fur ther interpret the deriv ation o f the mirror e qua tion . In deriving this
equa tion , we found tha t the object and ima ge heights are rela ted by
See Equa tion 2.3 . Both the object and the ima ge forme d by the mirror in Figure 2.10 are re al, so the object and
ima ge dis tanc es are b oth p ositiv e. The highes t point o f the object is a bove the optic al axis , so the object height
is positiv e. The ima ge, however, is b elow the optic al axis , so the ima ge height is neg ative. Thus , this sign
convention is c onsis tent with our deriv ation o f the mirror e qua tion .
Equa tion 2.7 in fact describ es the line ar ma gnific ation (often simply c alled “ma gnific ation ”) of the ima ge in
terms o f the object and ima ge dis tanc es. We thus define the dimensionles s ma gnific ation mas follows:2.4
2.5
2.6
2.760 2 • Geome tric Op tics and Image F ormation
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Ifmis positiv e, the ima ge is upright , and if mis neg ative, the ima ge is in verted. If , the ima ge is larg er
than the object , and if , the ima ge is smaller than the object . With this definition o f ma gnific ation , we
get the f ollowing rela tion b etween the v ertical and horiz ontal object and ima ge dis tanc es:
This is a v ery useful rela tion b ecause it lets y ou obtain the ma gnific ation o f the ima ge from the object and
ima ge dis tanc es, which y ou c an obtain from the mirror e qua tion .
EXAMPLE 2.1
Solar Electric Gener ating Sy stem
One o f the solar technologies use d to day for g enera ting electricity in volves a devic e (called a p arabolic trough
or c oncentra ting c ollector) tha t concentra tes sunlight onto a black ened pip e tha t contains a fluid . This he ated
fluid is pump ed to a he at exchang er, where the thermal energ y is trans ferre d to another s ystem tha t is use d to
genera te steam and ev entually g enera tes electricity through a c onventional s team cy cle.Figure 2.11 shows
such a w orking s ystem in southern C alifornia. The re al mirror is a p arabolic cylinder with its f ocus lo cated at
the pip e; ho wever, we can appro xima te the mirror as e xactly one -quar ter o f a circular cylinder .
Figur e2.11 Parabolic tr ough c ollectors ar e used t o gener ate electricity in southern Calif ornia . (credit: “kjk olb”/Wikimedia Commons)
a.If we want the ra ys from the sun to f ocus a t 40.0 cm from the mirror , wha t is the radius o f the mirror?
b.Wha t is the amount o f sunlight c oncentra ted onto the pip e, per meter o f pip e length , assuming the
insola tion (incident solar radia tion) is 900 ?
c.If the fluid-c arrying pip e has a 2.00- cm diameter , wha t is the temp erature incre ase o f the fluid p er meter
of pip e over a p erio d of 1 minute? As sume tha t all solar radia tion incident on the reflector is a bsorb ed by
the pip e, and tha t the fluid is mineral oil .
Strategy
First identif y the ph ysical principles in volved. Part (a) is rela ted to the optics o f spheric al mirrors . Part (b)
involves a lit tle ma th, primarily g eometr y. Part (c) re quires an unders tanding o f he at and density .
Solution
a.The sun is the object , so the object dis tanc e is es sentially infinity: . The desire d ima ge dis tanc e is
. We use the mirror e qua tion to find the f ocal length o f the mirror:2.8
2.92.2 • Spherical Mirr ors 61

Thus , the radius o f the mirror is .
b.The insola tion is 900 . You mus t find the cros s-sectional are aAof the c oncave mirror , sinc e the
power deliv ered is 900 . The mirror in this c ase is es tima ted as a quar ter-section o f a cylinder ,
so the are a for a length Lof the mirror is . The are a for a length o f 1.00 m is then
The insola tion on the 1.00-m length o f pip e is then
c.The incre ase in temp erature is giv en b y . The mas smof the mineral oil in the one -meter
section o f pip e is
Theref ore, the incre ase in temp erature in one minute is
Significanc e
An arra y of such pip es in the C alifornia deser t can pro vide a thermal output o f 250 MW on a sunn y da y, with
fluids re aching temp eratures as high as . We are c onsidering only one meter o f pip e here and ignoring
heat los ses along the pip e.
EXAMPLE 2.2
Imag e in a Con vex Mirr or
A keratometer is a devic e use d to me asure the cur vature o f the c orne a of the e ye, particularly f or fit ting c ontact
lenses . Light is reflecte d from the c orne a, which acts lik e a c onvex mirror , and the k eratometer me asures the
magnific ation o f the ima ge. The smaller the ma gnific ation , the smaller the radius o f cur vature o f the c orne a. If
the light sourc e is 12 cm from the c orne a and the ima ge ma gnific ation is 0.032, wha t is the radius o f cur vature
of the c orne a?
Strategy
If you find the f ocal length o f the c onvex mirror f orme d by the c orne a, then y ou kno w its radius o f cur vature
(it’s twic e the f ocal length). The object dis tanc e is and the ma gnific ation is . First find the
ima ge dis tanc e and then solv e for the f ocal length f.
Solution
Star t with the e qua tion f or ma gnific ation , . Solving f or and inser ting the giv en v alues yields62 2 • Geome tric Op tics and Image F ormation
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

where w e retaine d an e xtra signific ant figure b ecause this is an interme diate step in the c alcula tion . Solv e the
mirror e qua tion f or the f ocal length fand inser t the kno wn v alues f or the object and ima ge dis tanc es. The
result is
The radius o f cur vature is twic e the f ocal length , so
Significanc e
The f ocal length is neg ative, so the f ocus is vir tual , as e xpecte d for a c oncave mirror and a re al object . The
radius o f cur vature f ound here is re asona ble f or a c orne a. The dis tanc e from c orne a to retina in an adult e ye is
about 2.0 cm . In practic e, corne as ma y not b e spheric al, which c omplic ates the job o f fitting c ontact lenses .
Note tha t the ima ge dis tanc e here is neg ative, consis tent with the fact tha t the ima ge is b ehind the mirror .
Thus , the ima ge is vir tual b ecause no ra ys actually p ass through it . In the problems and e xercises , you will
show tha t, for a fix ed object dis tanc e, a smaller radius o f cur vature c orresp onds to a smaller the ma gnific ation .
PROBLEM-SOL VING S TRATEGY
Spherical Mirr ors
Step 1. F irst mak e sure tha t ima ge forma tion b y a spheric al mirror is in volved.
Step 2. Determine whether ra y tracing , the mirror e qua tion , or b oth are re quire d. A sk etch is v ery useful ev en
if ra y tracing is not sp ecific ally re quire d by the problem . Write s ymb ols and kno wn v alues on the sk etch .
Step 3. Identif y exactly wha t nee ds to b e determine d in the problem (identif y the unkno wns).
Step 4. Mak e a lis t of wha t is giv en or c an b e inf erre d from the problem as s tated (identif y the kno wns).
Step 5. If ra y tracing is re quire d, use the ra y-tracing r ules lis ted ne ar the b eginning o f this section .
Step 6. Mos t quantita tive problems re quire using the mirror e qua tion . Use the e xamples as guides f or using the
mirror e qua tion .
Step 7. Check to see whether the ans wer mak es sense . Do the signs o f object dis tanc e, ima ge dis tanc e, and
focal length c orresp ond with wha t is e xpecte d from ra y tracing? Is the sign o f the ma gnific ation c orrect? Are
the object and ima ge dis tanc es re asona ble?
Depar ture from the Small-Angle Appr oximation
The small-angle appro xima tion is a c orners tone o f the a bove discus sion o f ima ge forma tion b y a spheric al
mirror . When this appro xima tion is viola ted, then the ima ge cre ated by a spheric al mirror b ecomes dis torted.
Such dis tortion is c alledaberrat ion. Here w e briefly discus s tw o sp ecific typ es o f aberra tions: spheric al
aberra tion and c oma.
Spherical aberr ation
Consider a bro ad b eam o f parallel ra ys impinging on a spheric al mirror , as sho wn in Figure 2.12 .2.2 • Spherical Mirr ors 63

Figur e2.12 (a) With spherical aberr ation, the r ays that ar e far ther fr om the op tical axis and the r ays that ar e closer t o the op tical axis ar e
focused at diff erent points . Notic e that the aberr ation g ets w orse f or rays far ther fr om the op tical axis . (b) F or comatic aberr ation, par allel
rays that ar e not par allel to the op tical axis ar e focused at diff erent heights and at diff erent f ocal lengths , so the imag e contains a “ tail” like
a comet (which is “ coma” in L atin). Not e that the c olored rays are onl y to facilitat e vie wing; the c olors do not indicat e the c olor o f the light.
The far ther from the optic al axis the ra ys strike, the w orse the spheric al mirror appro xima tes a p arabolic
mirror . Thus , these ra ys are not f ocuse d at the same p oint as ra ys tha t are ne ar the optic al axis , as sho wn in the
figure . Bec ause o fspheric al ab errat ion, the ima ge of an e xtende d object in a spheric al mirror will b e blurre d.
Spheric al aberra tions are characteris tic o f the mirrors and lenses tha t we consider in the f ollowing section o f
this chapter (more sophis ticated mirrors and lenses are nee ded to elimina te spheric al aberra tions).
Coma or comatic aberr ation
Coma is similar to spheric al aberra tion , but arises when the inc oming ra ys are not p arallel to the optic al axis ,
as sho wn in p art (b) ofFigure 2.12 . Recall tha t the small-angle appro xima tion holds f or spheric al mirrors tha t
are small c omp ared to their radius . In this c ase, spheric al mirrors are g ood appro xima tions o f parabolic
mirrors . Parabolic mirrors f ocus all ra ys tha t are p arallel to the optic al axis a t the f ocal point . Ho wever, parallel
rays tha t are not parallel to the optic al axis are f ocuse d at diff erent heights and a t diff erent f ocal lengths , as
show in p art (b) ofFigure 2.12 . Bec ause a spheric al mirror is s ymmetric a bout the optic al axis , the v arious
colore d ra ys in this figure cre ate circles o f the c orresp onding c olor on the f ocal plane .
Although a spheric al mirror is sho wn in p art (b) ofFigure 2.12 , coma tic a berra tion o ccurs also f or p arabolic
mirrors —it do es not result from a bre akdown in the small-angle appro xima tion . Spheric al aberra tion , however,
occurs only f or spheric al mirrors and is a result o f a bre akdown in the small-angle appro xima tion . We will
discus s both coma and spheric al aberra tion la ter in this chapter , in c onnection with telesc opes.64 2 • Geome tric Op tics and Image F ormation
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

2.3Images F ormed b y Re fraction
Learning Objectiv es
By the end o f this section, y ou wil l be able t o:
•Describe image f ormation b y a single r efracting sur face
•Determine the location o f an image and calculate its pr oper ties b y using a r ay diagr am
•Determine the location o f an image and calculate its pr oper ties b y using the equation f or a single r efracting
surface
When ra ys of light prop agate from one me dium to another , these ra ys underg o refraction , which is when light
waves are b ent a t the inter face between tw o me dia. The refracting sur face can f orm an ima ge in a similar
fashion to a reflecting sur face, except tha t the la w of refraction (Snell ’s law) is a t the he art of the pro cess
instead o f the la w of reflection .
Refraction at a Plane Inter face—Appar ent Dep th
If you lo ok a t a s traight ro d partially submerg ed in w ater, it app ears to b end a t the sur face (Figure 2.13 ). The
reason b ehind this curious eff ect is tha t the ima ge of the ro d inside the w ater f orms a lit tle closer to the sur face
than the actual p osition o f the ro d, so it do es not line up with the p art of the ro d tha t is a bove the w ater. The
same phenomenon e xplains wh y a fish in w ater app ears to b e closer to the sur face than it actually is .
Figur e2.13 Bending o f a rod at a w ater-air int erface. Point Pon the r od appears t o be at point Q, which is wher e the imag e of point P
forms due t o refraction at the air -water int erface.
To study ima ge forma tion as a result o f refraction , consider the f ollowing ques tions:
1. Wha t happ ens to the ra ys of light when the y enter or p ass through a diff erent me dium?
2. Do the refracte d ra ys origina ting from a single p oint meet a t some p oint or div erge away from e ach other?
To be concrete , we consider a simple s ystem c onsis ting o f two me dia sep arated by a plane inter face (Figure
2.14 ). The object is in one me dium and the obser ver is in the other . For ins tanc e, when y ou lo ok a t a fish from
above the w ater sur face, the fish is in me dium 1 (the w ater) with refractiv e inde x 1.33, and y our e ye is in
medium 2 (the air) with refractiv e inde x 1.00, and the sur face of the w ater is the inter face. The depth tha t you
“see” is the ima ge height and is c alled the app arent depth . The actual depth o f the fish is the object height
.2.3 • Images F ormed b y Re fraction 65

Figur e2.14 Appar ent dep th due t o refraction. The r eal object at point Pcreates an imag e at point Q. The imag e is not at the same dep th
as the object, so the obser ver sees the imag e at an “ appar ent dep th.”
The app arent depth dep ends on the angle a t which y ou view the ima ge. For a view from a bove (the so -called
“normal ” view ), we can appro xima te the refraction angle to b e small , and replac e sin in Snell ’s law by tan .
With this appro xima tion , you c an use the triangles and to sho w tha t the app arent depth is giv en
by
The deriv ation o f this result is left as an e xercise . Thus , a fish app ears a t 3/4 o f the re al depth when view ed
from a bove.
Refraction at a Spherical Inter face
Spheric al shap es pla y an imp ortant role in optics primarily b ecause high-quality spheric al shap es are far
easier to manufacture than other cur ved sur faces. To study refraction a t a single spheric al sur face, we as sume
that the me dium with the spheric al sur face at one end c ontinues indefinitely (a “ semi-infinite ” me dium).
Refraction at a conv ex sur face
Consider a p oint sourc e of light a t point Pin front o f a c onvex sur face made o f glas s (see Figure 2.15 ). Let Rbe
the radius o f cur vature , be the refractiv e inde x of the me dium in which object p oint Pis lo cated, and be
the refractiv e inde x of the me dium with the spheric al sur face. We want to kno w wha t happ ens as a result o f
refraction a t this inter face.
Figur e2.15 Refraction at a c onvex sur face .
Because o f the s ymmetr y involved, it is sufficient to e xamine ra ys in only one plane . The figure sho ws a ra y of
light tha t starts at the object p oint P, refracts a t the inter face, and g oes through the ima ge point . We deriv e a
formula rela ting the object dis tanc e , the ima ge dis tanc e , and the radius o f cur vature R.2.1066 2 • Geome tric Op tics and Image F ormation
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Applying Snell ’s law to the ra y emana ting from p oint Pgives . We work in the small-angle
appro xima tion , so and Snell ’s law then tak es the f orm
From the g eometr y of the figure , we see tha t
Inser ting these e xpres sions into Snell ’s law giv es
Using the dia gram , we calcula te the tang ent o f the angles :
Again using the small-angle appro xima tion , we find tha t , so the a bove rela tionships b ecome
Putting these angles into Snell ’s law giv es
We can write this more c onveniently as
If the object is plac ed at a sp ecial p oint c alled the first focus, or the object f ocus , then the ima ge is f orme d
at infinity , as sho wn in p art (a) o fFigure 2.16 .
Figur e2.16 (a) Firs t focus (cal led the “ object f ocus”) f or refraction at a c onvex sur face. (b) Sec ond f ocus (cal led “imag e focus”) f or
refraction at a c onvex sur face.
We can find the lo cation of the firs t focus by set ting in the prec eding e qua tion .
Similarly , we can define a second f ocus orima ge focus where the ima ge is f orme d for an object tha t is far
away [part (b)]. The lo cation o f the sec ond f ocus is obtaine d from Equa tion 2.11 by set ting :2.11
2.12
2.132.3 • Images F ormed b y Re fraction 67

Note tha t the object f ocus is a t a diff erent dis tanc e from the v ertex than the ima ge focus b ecause .
Sign conv ention f or single r efracting sur faces
Although w e deriv ed this e qua tion f or refraction a t a c onvex sur face, the same e xpres sion holds f or a c oncave
surface, pro vide d we use the f ollowing sign c onvention:
1. if sur face is c onvex toward object; other wise ,
2. if ima ge is re al and on opp osite side from the object; other wise ,
2.4Thin L enses
Learning Objectiv es
By the end o f this section, y ou wil l be able t o:
•Use r ay diagr ams to locate and describe the image f ormed b y a lens
•Emplo y the thin-lens equation to describe and locate the image f ormed b y a lens
Lenses are f ound in a hug e arra y of optic al ins truments , ranging from a simple ma gnif ying glas s to a c amera ’s
zoom lens to the e ye itself. In this section , we use the Snell ’s law to e xplore the prop erties o f lenses and ho w
they form ima ges.
The w ord “lens” deriv es from the La tin w ord f or a lentil b ean, the shap e of which is similar to a c onvex lens .
However, not all lenses ha ve the same shap e.Figure 2.17 shows a v ariety o f diff erent lens shap es. The
vocabular y use d to describ e lenses is the same as tha t use d for spheric al mirrors: The axis o f symmetr y of a
lens is c alled the optic al axis , where this axis intersects the lens sur face is c alled the v ertex of the lens , and so
forth.
Figur e2.17 Various types o f lenses: Not e that a c onverging lens has a thick er “waist,” wher eas a div erging lens has a thinner w aist.
Aconvexorconverging lens is shap ed so tha t all light ra ys tha t enter it p arallel to its optic al axis intersect (or
focus) a t a single p oint on the optic al axis on the opp osite side o f the lens , as sho wn in p art (a) o fFigure 2.18 .
Likewise , aconc aveordiverging lens is shap ed so tha t all ra ys tha t enter it p arallel to its optic al axis div erge,
as sho wn in p art (b). T o unders tand more precisely ho w a lens manipula tes light , look closely a t the top ra y
that goes through the c onverging lens in p art (a). Bec ause the inde x of refraction o f the lens is gre ater than tha t
of air , Snell ’s law tells us tha t the ra y is b ent to ward the p erpendicular to the inter face as it enters the lens .
Likewise , when the ra y exits the lens , it is b ent a way from the p erpendicular . The same re asoning applies to the
diverging lenses , as sho wn in p art (b). The o verall eff ect is tha t light ra ys are b ent to ward the optic al axis f or a
converging lens and a way from the optic al axis f or div erging lenses . For a c onverging lens , the p oint a t which68 2 • Geome tric Op tics and Image F ormation
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

the ra ys cros s is the f ocal point Fof the lens . For a div erging lens , the p oint from which the ra ys app ear to
origina te is the ( virtual) f ocal point . The dis tanc e from the c enter o f the lens to its f ocal point is the f ocal length
fof the lens .
Figur e2.18 Rays of light ent ering (a) a c onverging lens and (b) a div erging lens , par allel to its axis , converge at its f ocal point F. The
distanc e from the c enter of the lens t o the f ocal point is the lens’ s focal length f. Not e that the light r ays are bent upon ent ering and e xiting
the lens , with the o verall effect being t o bend the r ays toward the op tical axis .
A lens is c onsidere d to b e thin if its thicknes stis much les s than the radii o f cur vature o f both sur faces, as
shown in Figure 2.19 . In this c ase, the ra ys ma y be considere d to b end onc e at the c enter o f the lens . For the
case dra wn in the figure , light ra y 1 is p arallel to the optic al axis , so the out going ra y is b ent onc e at the c enter
of the lens and g oes through the f ocal point . Another imp ortant characteris tic o f thin lenses is tha t light ra ys
that pass through the c enter o f the lens are undevia ted, as sho wn b y light ra y 2.
Figur e2.19 In the thin-lens appr oximation, the thicknes stof the lens is much, much les s than the r adii and of cur vatur e of the
surfaces o f the lens . Light r ays are consider ed to bend at the c enter of the lens , such as light r ay 1. Light r ay 2 pas ses thr ough the c enter of
the lens and is unde viated in the thin-lens appr oximation.
As note d in the initial discus sion o f Snell ’s law, the p aths o f light ra ys are e xactly rev ersible . This me ans tha t
the direction o f the arro ws could b e rev erse d for all o f the ra ys in Figure 2.18 . For e xample , if a p oint -light
sourc e is plac ed at the f ocal point o f a c onvex lens , as sho wn in Figure 2.20 , parallel light ra ys emerg e from the
other side .2.4 • Thin L enses 69

Figur e2.20 A smal l light sour ce, like a light bulb filament, plac ed at the f ocal point o f a c onvex lens r esul ts in par allel rays of light
emer ging fr om the other side . The paths ar e exactl y the r everse o f those sho wn in Figure 2.18 in converging and div erging lenses . This
technique is used in lighthouses and sometimes in tr affic lights t o produc e a dir ectional beam o f light fr om a sour ce that emits light in al l
directions .
Ray T racing and Thin L enses
Ray tracing is the technique o f determining or f ollowing (tracing ) the p aths tak en b y light ra ys.
Ray tracing f orthin lenses is very similar to the technique w e use d with spheric al mirrors . As f or mirrors ,ray
tracing can ac cura tely describ e the op eration o f a lens . The r ules f or ra y tracing f or thin lenses are similar to
those o f spheric al mirrors:
1. A ra y entering a c onverging lens p arallel to the optic al axis p asses through the f ocal point on the other side o f
the lens (ra y 1 in p art (a) o fFigure 2.21 ). A ra y entering a div erging lens p arallel to the optic al axis e xits along
the line tha t passes through the f ocal point on the same side o f the lens (ra y 1 in p art (b) of the figure).
2. A ra y passing through the c enter o f either a c onverging or a div erging lens is not devia ted (ra y 2 in p arts (a) and
(b)).
3. For a c onverging lens , a ra y tha t passes through the f ocal point e xits the lens p arallel to the optic al axis (ra y 3
in p art (a)). F or a div erging lens , a ra y tha t appro aches along the line tha t passes through the f ocal point on the
opp osite side e xits the lens p arallel to the axis (ra y 3 in p art (b)).70 2 • Geome tric Op tics and Image F ormation
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Figur e2.21 Thin lenses ha ve the same f ocal lengths on either side . (a) P arallel light r ays from the object t oward a c onverging lens cr oss at
its focal point on the right. (b) P arallel light r ays from the object ent ering a div erging lens fr om the left seem t o come fr om the f ocal point on
the left.
Thin lenses w ork quite w ell for mono chroma tic light (i .e., light o f a single w avelength). Ho wever, for light tha t
contains sev eral w avelengths (e .g., white light), the lenses w ork les s well. The problem is tha t, as w e learne d in
the previous chapter , the inde x of refraction o f a ma terial dep ends on the w avelength o f light . This
phenomenon is resp onsible f or man y color ful eff ects , such as rainb ows. Unf ortuna tely, this phenomenon also
leads to a berra tions in ima ges forme d by lenses . In p articular , because the f ocal dis tanc e of the lens dep ends
on the inde x of refraction , it also dep ends on the w avelength o f the incident light . This me ans tha t light o f
different w avelengths will f ocus a t diff erent p oints , resulting is so -called “chroma tic a berra tions .” In p articular ,
the e dges o f an ima ge of a white object will b ecome c olore d and blurre d. Special lenses c alled doublets are
capable o f correcting chroma tic a berra tions . A doublet is f orme d by gluing tog ether a c onverging lens and a
diverging lens . The c ombine d doublet lens pro duces signific antly re duced chroma tic a berra tions .
Image F ormation b y Thin L enses
We use ra y tracing to in vestigate diff erent typ es o f ima ges tha t can b e cre ated by a lens . In some
circums tanc es, a lens f orms a re al ima ge, such as when a mo vie projector c asts an ima ge onto a screen . In
other c ases , the ima ge is a vir tual ima ge, which c annot b e projecte d onto a screen . Where , for e xample , is the
ima ge forme d by eyeglas ses? W e use ra y tracing f or thin lenses to illus trate ho w the y form ima ges, and then w e
develop e qua tions to analyz e quantita tively the prop erties o f thin lenses .
Consider an object some dis tanc e away from a c onverging lens , as sho wn in Figure 2.22 . To find the lo cation
and siz e of the ima ge, we trac e the p aths o f selecte d light ra ys origina ting from one p oint on the object , in this
case, the tip o f the arro w. The figure sho ws three ra ys from man y ra ys tha t emana te from the tip o f the arro w.
These three ra ys can b e trac ed by using the ra y-tracing r ules giv en a bove.
•Ray 1 enters the lens p arallel to the optic al axis and p asses through the f ocal point on the opp osite side
(rule 1).
•Ray 2 p asses through the c enter o f the lens and is not devia ted (rule 2).2.4 • Thin L enses 71

•Ray 3 p asses through the f ocal point on its w ay to the lens and e xits the lens p arallel to the optic al axis
(rule 3).
The three ra ys cros s at a single p oint on the opp osite side o f the lens . Thus , the ima ge of the tip o f the arro w is
located at this p oint . All ra ys tha t come from the tip o f the arro w and enter the lens are refracte d and cros s at
the p oint sho wn.
After lo cating the ima ge of the tip o f the arro w, we nee d another p oint o f the ima ge to orient the entire ima ge of
the arro w. We chose to lo cate the ima ge base o f the arro w, which is on the optic al axis . As e xplaine d in the
section on spheric al mirrors , the b ase will b e on the optic al axis jus t above the ima ge of the tip o f the arro w
(due to the top -bottom s ymmetr y of the lens). Thus , the ima ge sp ans the optic al axis to the (neg ative) height
shown. Rays from another p oint on the arro w, such as the middle o f the arro w, cros s at another c ommon p oint ,
thus filling in the res t of the ima ge.
Although three ra ys are trac ed in this figure , only tw o are nec essary to lo cate a p oint o f the ima ge. It is b est to
trac e ra ys for which there are simple ra y-tracing r ules .
Figur e2.22 Ray tracing is used t o locat e the imag e formed b y a lens . Rays originating fr om the same point on the object ar e traced—the
three chosen r ays each f ollow one o f the rules f or ray tracing , so that their paths ar e eas y to det ermine . The imag e is locat ed at the point
wher e the r ays cross. In this case , a real imag e—one that can be pr oject ed on a scr een—is f ormed.
Several imp ortant dis tanc es app ear in the figure . As f or a mirror , we define to b e the object dis tanc e, or the
distanc e of an object from the c enter o f a lens . The ima ge dis tanc e is define d to b e the dis tanc e of the ima ge
from the c enter o f a lens . The height o f the object and the height o f the ima ge are indic ated by and ,
resp ectiv ely. Ima ges tha t app ear upright rela tive to the object ha ve positiv e heights , and those tha t are in verted
have neg ative heights . By using the r ules o f ray tracing and making a sc ale dra wing with p aper and p encil , like
that in Figure 2.22 , we can ac cura tely describ e the lo cation and siz e of an ima ge. But the re al benefit o f ray
tracing is in visualizing ho w ima ges are f orme d in a v ariety o f situa tions .
Oblique P arallel Ray s and F ocal Plane
We ha ve seen tha t rays parallel to the optic al axis are directe d to the f ocal point o f a c onverging lens . In the
case o f a div erging lens , the y come out in a direction such tha t the y app ear to b e coming from the f ocal point
on the opp osite side o f the lens (i .e., the side from which p arallel ra ys enter the lens). Wha t happ ens to p arallel
rays tha t are not p arallel to the optic al axis ( Figure 2.23 )? In the c ase o f a c onverging lens , these ra ys do not
converge at the f ocal point . Ins tead, the y come tog ether on another p oint in the plane c alled the focal plane .
The f ocal plane c ontains the f ocal point and is p erpendicular to the optic al axis . As sho wn in the figure , parallel
rays focus where the ra y through the c enter o f the lens cros ses the f ocal plane .72 2 • Geome tric Op tics and Image F ormation
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Figur e2.23 Parallel oblique r ays focus on a point in a f ocal plane .
Thin-L ens Equation
Ray tracing allo ws us to g et a qualita tive picture o f ima ge forma tion . To obtain numeric inf orma tion , we deriv e
a pair o f equa tions from a g eometric analy sis o f ray tracing f or thin lenses . These e qua tions , called the thin-
lens e qua tion and the lens mak er’s equa tion , allo w us to quantita tively analyz e thin lenses .
Consider the thick bi-c onvex lens sho wn in Figure 2.24 . The inde x of refraction o f the surrounding me dium is
(if the lens is in air , then ) and tha t of the lens is . The radii o f cur vatures o f the tw o sides are
. We wish to find a rela tion b etween the object dis tanc e , the ima ge dis tanc e , and the
parameters o f the lens .
Figur e2.24 Figure for deriving the lens mak er’s equation. Her e,tis the thicknes s of lens , is the inde x of refraction o f the e xterior
medium, and is the inde x of refraction o f the lens . We tak e the limit o f to ob tain the f ormula f or a thin lens .
To deriv e the thin-lens e qua tion , we consider the ima ge forme d by the firs t refracting sur face (i.e., left sur face)
and then use this ima ge as the object f or the sec ond refracting sur face. In the figure , the ima ge from the firs t
refracting sur face is , which is f orme d by extending b ackw ards the ra ys from inside the lens (these ra ys
result from refraction a t the firs t sur face). This is sho wn b y the dashe d lines in the figure . Notice tha t this
ima ge is vir tual b ecause no ra ys actually p ass through the p oint . To find the ima ge dis tanc e
corresp onding to the ima ge , we use Equa tion 2.11 . In this c ase, the object dis tanc e is , the ima ge dis tanc e
is , and the radius o f cur vature is . Inser ting these into Equa tion 2.3 gives
The ima ge is vir tual and on the same side as the object , so and . The firs t sur face is c onvex2.142.4 • Thin L enses 73

toward the object , so .
To find the object dis tanc e for the object Qforme d by refraction from the sec ond inter face, note tha t the role o f
the indic es o f refraction and are interchang ed in Equa tion 2.11 . InFigure 2.24 , the ra ys origina te in the
medium with inde x , where as in Figure 2.15 , the ra ys origina te in the me dium with inde x . Thus , we mus t
interchang e and inEqua tion 2.11 . In addition , by consulting a gainFigure 2.24 , we see tha t the object
distanc e is and the ima ge dis tanc e is . The radius o f cur vature is Inser ting these quantities into
Equa tion 2.11 gives
The ima ge is re al and on the opp osite side from the object , so and . The sec ond sur face is c onvex
away from the object , so .Equa tion 2.15 can b e simplifie d by noting tha t , where w e ha ve
taken the a bsolute v alue b ecause is a neg ative numb er, where as b oth and tare p ositiv e. We can disp ense
with the a bsolute v alue if w e neg ate , which giv es . Inser ting this into Equa tion 2.15 gives
Summing Equa tion 2.14 and Equa tion 2.16 gives
In the thin-lens appro ximat ion, we as sume tha t the lens is v ery thin c omp ared to the firs t ima ge dis tanc e, or
(or, equiv alently , ). In this c ase, the third and f ourth terms on the left -hand side o f
Equa tion 2.17 cancel, leaving us with
Dividing b y gives us finally
The left -hand side lo oks suspiciously lik e the mirror e qua tion tha t we deriv ed above for spheric al mirrors . As
done f or spheric al mirrors , we can use ra y tracing and g eometr y to sho w tha t, for a thin lens ,
where fis the f ocal length o f the thin lens (this deriv ation is left as an e xercise). This is the thin-lens e qua tion .
The f ocal length o f a thin lens is the same to the left and to the right o f the lens . Combining Equa tion 2.18 and
Equa tion 2.19 gives
which is c alled the lens mak er’s equa tion . It sho ws tha t the f ocal length o f a thin lens dep ends only o f the radii
of cur vature and the inde x of refraction o f the lens and tha t of the surrounding me dium . For a lens in air ,
and , so the lens mak er’s equa tion re duces to2.15
2.16
2.17
2.18
2.19
2.20
2.2174 2 • Geome tric Op tics and Image F ormation
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Sign conv entions f or lenses
To prop erly use the thin-lens e qua tion , the f ollowing sign c onventions mus t be ob eyed:
1. is positiv e if the ima ge is on the side opp osite the object (i .e., re al ima ge); other wise ,is neg ative (i.e.,
virtual ima ge).
2. fis positiv e for a c onverging lens and neg ative for a div erging lens .
3. Ris positiv e for a sur face convex toward the object , and neg ative for a sur face concave toward object .
Magnification
By using a finite -size object on the optic al axis and ra y tracing , you c an sho w tha t the ma gnific ation mof an
ima ge is
(where the three lines me an “is define d as”). This is e xactly the same e qua tion as w e obtaine d for mirrors (see
Equa tion 2.8 ). If , then the ima ge has the same v ertical orienta tion as the object (c alled an “upright ”
ima ge). If , then the ima ge has the opp osite v ertical orienta tion as the object (c alled an “in verted” ima ge).
Using the Thin-L ens Equation
The thin-lens e qua tion and the lens mak er’s equa tion are bro adly applic able to situa tions in volving thin
lenses . We explore man y features o f ima ge forma tion in the f ollowing e xamples .
Consider a thin c onverging lens . Where do es the ima ge form and wha t typ e of ima ge is f orme d as the object
appro aches the lens from infinity? This ma y be seen b y using the thin-lens e qua tion f or a giv en f ocal length to
plot the ima ge dis tanc e as a function o f object dis tanc e. In other w ords , we plot
for a giv en v alue o ff. For , the result is sho wn in p art (a) o fFigure 2.25 .
Figur e2.25 (a) Imag e dis tanc e for a thin c onverging lens with as a function o f object dis tanc e. (b) Same thing but f or a
diverging lens with .
An object much far ther than the f ocal length ffrom the lens should pro duce an ima ge ne ar the f ocal plane ,
because the sec ond term on the right -hand side o f the e qua tion a bove becomes negligible c omp ared to the firs t
term , so w e ha ve This c an b e seen in the plot o f part (a) o f the figure , which sho ws tha t the ima ge
distanc e appro aches as ymptotic ally the f ocal length o f 1 cm f or larg er object dis tanc es. As the object
appro aches the f ocal plane , the ima ge dis tanc e div erges to p ositiv e infinity . This is e xpecte d because an object
at the f ocal plane pro duces p arallel ra ys tha t form an ima ge at infinity (i .e., very far from the lens). When the2.222.4 • Thin L enses 75

object is far ther than the f ocal length from the lens , the ima ge dis tanc e is p ositiv e, so the ima ge is re al, on the
opp osite side o f the lens from the object , and in verted (because ). When the object is closer than
the f ocal length from the lens , the ima ge dis tanc e becomes neg ative, which me ans tha t the ima ge is vir tual , on
the same side o f the lens as the object , and upright .
For a thin div erging lens o f focal length , a similar plot o f ima ge dis tanc e vs . object dis tanc e is
shown in p art (b). In this c ase, the ima ge dis tanc e is neg ative for all p ositiv e object dis tanc es, which me ans tha t
the ima ge is vir tual , on the same side o f the lens as the object , and upright . These characteris tics ma y also b e
seen b y ra y-tracing dia grams (see Figure 2.26 ).
Figur e2.26 The r ed dots sho w the f ocal points o f the lenses . (a) A r eal, inverted imag e formed fr om an object that is far ther than the f ocal
length fr om a c onverging lens . (b) A vir tual, upright imag e formed fr om an object that is closer than a f ocal length fr om the lens . (c) A vir tual,
upright imag e formed fr om an object that is far ther than a f ocal length fr om a div erging lens .
To see a c oncrete e xample o f upright and in verted ima ges, look a tFigure 2.27 , which sho ws ima ges forme d by
converging lenses when the object (the p erson ’s fac e in this c ase) is plac e at diff erent dis tanc es from the lens .
In p art (a) o f the figure , the p erson ’s fac e is far ther than one f ocal length from the lens , so the ima ge is in verted.
In p art (b), the p erson ’s fac e is closer than one f ocal length from the lens , so the ima ge is upright .
Figur e2.27 (a) When a c onverging lens is held far ther than one f ocal length fr om the man ’s fac e, an in verted imag e is f ormed. Not e that
the imag e is in f ocus but the fac e is not, because the imag e is much closer t o the camer a taking this phot ograph than the fac e. (b) An
upright imag e of the man ’s fac e is pr oduc ed when a c onverging lens is held at les s than one f ocal length fr om his fac e. (credit a:
modification o f work b y “DaMongMan ”/Flickr; cr edit b: modification o f work b y Case y Fleser)
Work through the f ollowing e xamples to b etter unders tand ho w thin lenses w ork.76 2 • Geome tric Op tics and Image F ormation
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

PROBLEM-SOL VING S TRATEGY
Lenses
Step 1. Determine whether ra y tracing , the thin-lens e qua tion , or b oth w ould b e useful . Even if ra y tracing is
not use d, a c areful sk etch is alw ays very useful . Write s ymb ols and v alues on the sk etch .
Step 2. Identif y wha t nee ds to b e determine d in the problem (identif y the unkno wns).
Step 3. Mak e a lis t of wha t is giv en or c an b e inf erre d from the problem (identif y the kno wns).
Step 4. If ra y tracing is re quire d, use the ra y-tracing r ules lis ted ne ar the b eginning o f this section .
Step 5. Mos t quantita tive problems re quire the use o f the thin-lens e qua tion and/or the lens mak er’s equa tion .
Solv e these f or the unkno wns and inser t the giv en quantities or use b oth tog ether to find tw o unkno wns .
Step 7. Check to see if the ans wer is re asona ble. Are the signs c orrect? Is the sk etch or ra y tracing c onsis tent
with the c alcula tion?
EXAMPLE 2.3
Using the L ens Mak er’s Equation
Find the radius o f cur vature o f a bic oncave lens s ymmetric ally ground from a glas s with inde x of refractiv e
1.55 so tha t its f ocal length in air is 20 cm (f or a bic oncave lens , both sur faces ha ve the same radius o f
curvature).
Strategy
Use the thin-lens f orm o f the lens mak er’s equa tion:
where and . Sinc e we are making a s ymmetric bic oncave lens , we ha ve .
Solution
We can determine the radius Rof cur vature from
Solving f orRand inser ting gives
EXAMPLE 2.4
Con verging L ens and Dif ferent Object Dis tanc es
Find the lo cation , orienta tion , and ma gnific ation o f the ima ge for an 3.0 cm high object a t each o f the f ollowing
positions in front o f a c onvex lens o f focal length 10.0 cm . , , and
.
Strategy
We start with the thin-lens e qua tion . Solv e this f or the ima ge dis tanc e and inser t the giv en
object dis tanc e and f ocal length .2.4 • Thin L enses 77

Solution
a.For , this giv es
The ima ge is p ositiv e, so the ima ge, is re al, is on the opp osite side o f the lens from the object , and is 12.6
cm from the lens . To find the ma gnific ation and orienta tion o f the ima ge, use
The neg ative ma gnific ation me ans tha t the ima ge is in verted. Sinc e , the ima ge is smaller than the
object . The siz e of the ima ge is giv en b y
b.For
The ima ge dis tanc e is neg ative, so the ima ge is vir tual , is on the same side o f the lens as the object , and is
10 cm from the lens . The ma gnific ation and orienta tion o f the ima ge are f ound from
The p ositiv e ma gnific ation me ans tha t the ima ge is upright (i .e., it has the same orienta tion as the object).
Sinc e , the ima ge is larg er than the object . The siz e of the ima ge is
c.For
The ima ge dis tanc e is p ositiv e, so the ima ge is re al, is on the opp osite side o f the lens from the object , and
is 20.0 cm from the lens . The ma gnific ation is
The neg ative ma gnific ation me ans tha t the ima ge is in verted. Sinc e , the ima ge is the same siz e as
the object .
When solving problems in g eometric optics , we often nee d to c ombine ra y tracing and the lens e qua tions . The
following e xample demons trates this appro ach.78 2 • Geome tric Op tics and Image F ormation
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

EXAMPLE 2.5
Choosing the F ocal L ength and T ype o f Lens
To project an ima ge of a light bulb on a screen 1.50 m a way, you nee d to cho ose wha t typ e of lens to use
(converging or div erging ) and its f ocal length ( Figure 2.28 ). The dis tanc e between the lens and the lightbulb is
fixed at 0.75 m . Also, wha t is the ma gnific ation and orienta tion o f the ima ge?
Strategy
The ima ge mus t be re al, so y ou cho ose to use a c onverging lens . The f ocal length c an b e found b y using the
thin-lens e qua tion and solving f or the f ocal length . The object dis tanc e is and the ima ge dis tanc e
is .
Solution
Solv e the thin lens f or the f ocal length and inser t the desire d object and ima ge dis tanc es:
The ma gnific ation is
Significanc e
The minus sign f or the ma gnific ation me ans tha t the ima ge is in verted. The f ocal length is p ositiv e, as
expecte d for a c onverging lens . Ray tracing c an b e use d to check the c alcula tion (see Figure 2.28 ). As e xpecte d,
the ima ge is in verted, is re al, and is larg er than the object .
Figur e2.28 A light bulb plac ed 0.75 m fr om a lens ha ving a 0.50-m f ocal length pr oduc es a r eal imag e on a scr een, as discus sed in the
example . Ray tracing pr edicts the imag e location and siz e.
2.5The Ey e
Learning Objectiv es
By the end o f this section, y ou wil l be able t o:
•Under stand the basic phy sics o f how images ar e formed b y the human e ye
•Recogniz e several conditions o f impair ed vision as w ell as the op tics principles f or treating these conditions
The human e ye is p erhaps the mos t interes ting and imp ortant o f all optic al ins truments . Our e yes p erform a
vast numb er o f functions: The y allo w us to sense direction , mo vement , colors , and dis tanc e. In this section , we2.5 • The Ey e 79

explore the g eometric optics o f the e ye.
Physics o f the Ey e
The e ye is remarka ble in ho w it f orms ima ges and in the richnes s of detail and c olor it c an detect . Ho wever, our
eyes o ften nee d some c orrection to re ach wha t is c alled “normal ” vision . Actually , normal vision should b e
called “ide al” vision b ecause ne arly one -half o f the human p opula tion re quires some sor t of eyesight
correction , so re quiring glas ses is b y no me ans “ abnormal .” Ima ge forma tion b y our e yes and c ommon vision
correction c an b e analyz ed with the optics discus sed earlier in this chapter .
Figure 2.29 shows the b asic ana tom y of the e ye. The corne aand lens f orm a s ystem tha t, to a g ood
appro xima tion , acts as a single thin lens . For cle ar vision , a re al ima ge mus t be projecte d onto the light -
sensitiv eretina , which lies a fix ed dis tanc e from the lens . The fle xible lens o f the e ye allo ws it to adjus t the
radius o f cur vature o f the lens to pro duce an ima ge on the retina f or objects a t diff erent dis tanc es. The c enter
of the ima ge falls on the f ovea, which has the gre atest density o f light rec eptors and the gre atest acuity
(sharpnes s) in the visual field . The v aria ble op ening (i .e., the pupil) o f the e ye, along with chemic al adapta tion ,
allows the e ye to detect light intensities from the lo west obser vable to times gre ater ( without dama ge).
This is an incre dible rang e of detection . Processing o f visual ner ve impulses b egins with interc onnections in
the retina and c ontinues in the brain . The optic ner ve conveys the signals rec eived by the e ye to the brain .
Figur e2.29 The c ornea and lens o f the e ye act t ogether t o form a r eal imag e on the light -sensing r etina , which has its denses t
concentr ation o f receptors in the f ovea and a blind spot o ver the op tic ner ve. The r adius o f cur vatur e of the lens o f an e ye is adjus table t o
form an imag e on the r etina f or diff erent object dis tanc es. Layers o f tissues with v arying indic es o f refraction in the lens ar e sho wn her e.
However, the y ha ve been omit ted fr om other pictur es for clarity .
The indic es o f refraction in the e ye are cr ucial to its a bility to f orm ima ges.Table 2.1 lists the indic es o f
refraction relev ant to the e ye. The bigg est chang e in the inde x of refraction , which is where the light ra ys are
mos t bent, occurs a t the air -corne a inter face ra ther than a t the aqueous humor -lens inter face. The ra y dia gram
inFigure 2.30 shows ima ge forma tion b y the c orne a and lens o f the e ye. The c orne a, which is itself a
converging lens with a f ocal length o f appro xima tely 2.3 cm , pro vides mos t of the f ocusing p ower o f the e ye.
The lens , which is a c onverging lens with a f ocal length o f about 6.4 cm , pro vides the finer f ocus nee ded to
produce a cle ar ima ge on the retina. The c orne a and lens c an b e tre ated as a single thin lens , even though the
light ra ys pass through sev eral la yers o f ma terial (such as c orne a, aqueous humor , sev eral la yers in the lens ,
and vitreous humor), changing direction a t each inter face. The ima ge forme d is much lik e the one pro duced by
a single c onvex lens (i .e., a re al, inverted ima ge). A lthough ima ges forme d in the e ye are in verted, the brain
inverts them onc e more to mak e them seem upright .
Material Index of Refraction
Water 1.3380 2 • Geome tric Op tics and Image F ormation
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Material Index of Refraction
Air 1.0
Corne a 1.38
Aqueous humor 1.34
Lens 1.41*
Vitreous humor 1.34
Table 2.1Refractiv e Indic es R elev ant to the Ey e*This is an a verage value . The actual inde x of refraction
varies throughout the lens and is gre atest in c enter o f the lens .
Figur e2.30 In the human e ye, an imag e forms on the r etina . Rays from the t op and bot tom o f the object ar e traced to sho w ho w a r eal,
inverted imag e is pr oduc ed on the r etina . The dis tanc e to the object is not t o scale .
As note d, the ima ge mus t fall precisely on the retina to pro duce cle ar vision—tha t is, the ima ge dis tanc e
mus t equal the lens -to-retina dis tanc e. Bec ause the lens -to-retina dis tanc e do es not chang e, the ima ge
distanc e mus t be the same f or objects a t all dis tanc es. The ciliar y muscles adjus t the shap e of the e ye lens
for focusing on ne arby or far objects . By changing the shap e of the e ye lens , the e ye chang es the f ocal length o f
the lens . This mechanism o f the e ye is c alledaccommo dation.
The ne ares t point an object c an b e plac ed so tha t the e ye can f orm a cle ar ima ge on the retina is c alled the near
point of the e ye. Similarly , the far p oint is the far thes t dis tanc e at which an object is cle arly visible . A p erson
with normal vision c an see objects cle arly a t dis tanc es ranging from 25 cm to es sentially infinity . The ne ar
point incre ases with a ge, becoming sev eral meters f or some older p eople . In this te xt, we consider the ne ar
point to b e 25 cm .
We can use the thin-lens e qua tions to quantita tively e xamine ima ge forma tion b y the e ye. First, we define the
optical p owerof a lens as
with the f ocal length fgiven in meters . The units o f optic al power are c alled “diopters” (D). Tha t is,
. Optometris ts prescrib e common e yeglas ses and c ontact lenses in units o fdiopters . With
this definition o f optic al power, we can rewrite the thin-lens e qua tions as2.232.5 • The Ey e 81

Working with optic al power is c onvenient b ecause, for tw o or more lenses close tog ether , the eff ectiv e optic al
power o f the lens s ystem is appro xima tely the sum o f the optic al power o f the individual lenses:
EXAMPLE 2.6
Effectiv e Focal L ength o f the Ey e
The c orne a and e ye lens ha ve focal lengths o f 2.3 and 6.4 cm , resp ectiv ely. Find the net f ocal length and optic al
power o f the e ye.
Strategy
The optic al powers o f the closely sp aced lenses add , so .
Solution
Writing the e qua tion f or p ower in terms o f the f ocal lengths giv es
Henc e, the f ocal length o f the e ye (corne a and lens tog ether) is
The optic al power o f the e ye is
For cle ar vision , the ima ge dis tanc e mus t equal the lens -to-retina dis tanc e. Normal vision is p ossible f or
objects a t dis tanc es to infinity . The f ollowing e xample sho ws ho w to c alcula te the ima ge dis tanc e
for an object plac ed at the ne ar p oint o f the e ye.
EXAMPLE 2.7
Imag e of an object plac ed a t the near point
The net f ocal length o f a p articular human e ye is 1.7 cm . An object is plac ed at the ne ar p oint o f the e ye. Ho w
far b ehind the lens is a f ocuse d ima ge forme d?
Strategy
The ne ar p oint is 25 cm from the e ye, so the object dis tanc e is . We determine the ima ge dis tanc e
from the lens e qua tion:
Solution2.24
2.2582 2 • Geome tric Op tics and Image F ormation
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Theref ore, the ima ge is f orme d 1.8 cm b ehind the lens .
Significanc e
From the ma gnific ation f ormula, w e find . Sinc e , the ima ge is in verted in
orienta tion with resp ect to the object . From the a bsolute v alue o fmwe see tha t the ima ge is much smaller than
the object; in fact , it is only 7% o f the siz e of the object .
Vision C orrection
The nee d for some typ e of vision c orrection is v ery common . Typic al vision def ects are e asy to unders tand
with g eometric optics , and some are simple to c orrect .Figure 2.31 illus trates tw o common vision def ects .
Nearsighte dnes s, ormyopia , is the a bility to see ne ar objects , where as dis tant objects are blurr y. The e ye
overconverges the ne arly p arallel ra ys from a dis tant object , and the ra ys cros s in front o f the retina. More
divergent ra ys from a close object are c onverged on the retina f or a cle ar ima ge. The dis tanc e to the far thes t
object tha t can b e seen cle arly is c alled the far p oint o f the e ye (normally the far p oint is a t infinity ).
Farsighte dnes s, orhyperopia , is the a bility to see far objects cle arly , where as ne ar objects are blurr y. A
farsighte d eye do es not sufficiently c onverge the ra ys from a ne ar object to mak e the ra ys meet on the retina.
Figur e2.31 (a) The nearsight ed (m yopic) e ye converges rays from a dis tant object in fr ont o f the r etina , so the y ha ve div erged when the y
strike the r etina , producing a blurr y imag e. An e ye lens that is t oo po werful can cause nearsight ednes s, or the e ye ma y be t oo long . (b) The
farsight ed (h yper opic) e ye is unable t o converge the r ays from a close object on the r etina , producing blurr y near -field vision. An e ye lens
with insufficient op tical po wer or an e ye that is t oo shor t can cause farsight ednes s.
Sinc e the ne arsighte d eye overconverges light ra ys, the c orrection f or ne arsighte dnes s consis ts of placing a
diverging e yeglas s lens in front o f the e ye, as sho wn in Figure 2.32 . This re duces the optic al power o f an e ye
that is to o powerful (rec all tha t the f ocal length o f a div erging lens is neg ative, so its optic al power is neg ative).
Another w ay to unders tand this c orrection is tha t a div erging lens will c ause the inc oming ra ys to div erge more
to comp ensa te for the e xcessive convergence caused by the lens s ystem o f the e ye. The ima ge pro duced by the2.5 • The Ey e 83

diverging e yeglas s lens ser ves as the (optic al) object f or the e ye, and b ecause the e ye cannot f ocus on objects
beyond its far p oint , the div erging lens mus t form an ima ge of dis tant (ph ysical) objects a t a p oint tha t is closer
than the far p oint .
Figur e2.32 Corr ection o f nearsight ednes s requir es a div erging lens that c ompensat es for overconvergence by the e ye. The div erging lens
produc es an imag e closer t o the e ye than the ph ysical object. This imag e ser ves as the op tical object f or the e ye, and the nearsight ed
person can see it clearl y because it is closer than their far point.
EXAMPLE 2.8
Corr ecting Nearsight ednes s
Wha t optic al power o f eyeglas s lens is nee ded to c orrect the vision o f a ne arsighte d person whose far p oint is
30.0 cm? As sume the c orrectiv e lens is fix ed 1.50 cm a way from the e ye.
Strategy
You w ant this ne arsighte d person to b e able to see dis tant objects cle arly , which me ans tha t the e yeglas s lens
mus t pro duce an ima ge 30.0 cm from the e ye for an object a t infinity . An ima ge 30.0 cm from the e ye will b e
from the e yeglas s lens . Theref ore, we mus t ha ve when .
The ima ge dis tanc e is neg ative because it is on the same side o f the e yeglas s lens as the object .
Solution
Sinc e and are kno wn, we can find the optic al power o f the e yeglas s lens b y using Equa tion 2.24 :
Significanc e
The neg ative optic al power indic ates a div erging (or c oncave) lens , as e xpecte d. If y ou e xamine e yeglas ses f or
nearsighte d people , you will find the lenses are thinnes t in the c enter . Additionally , if y ou e xamine a
prescription f or e yeglas ses f or ne arsighte d people , you will find tha t the prescrib ed optic al power is neg ative84 2 • Geome tric Op tics and Image F ormation
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

and giv en in units o f diopters .
Correcting farsighte dnes s consis ts simply o f using the opp osite typ e of lens as f or ne arsighte dnes s (i.e., a
converging lens), as sho wn in Figure 2.33 .
Such a lens will pro duce an ima ge of ph ysical objects tha t are closer than the ne ar p oint a t a dis tanc e tha t is
between the ne ar p oint and the far p oint , so tha t the p erson c an see the ima ge cle arly . To determine the optic al
power nee ded for c orrection , you mus t theref ore kno w the p erson ’s ne ar p oint , as e xplaine d in Example 2.9 .
Figur e2.33 Corr ection o f farsight ednes s uses a c onverging lens that c ompensat es for the under convergence by the e ye. The c onverging
lens pr oduc es an imag e far ther fr om the e ye than the object, so that the farsight ed person can see it clearl y.
EXAMPLE 2.9
Corr ecting F arsight ednes s
Wha t optic al power o f eyeglas s lens is nee ded to allo w a farsighte d person , whose ne ar p oint is 1.00 m , to see
an object cle arly tha t is 25.0 cm from the e ye? As sume the c orrectiv e lens is fix ed 1.5 cm from the e ye.
Strategy
When an object is 25.0 cm from the p erson ’s eyes, the e yeglas s lens mus t pro duce an ima ge 1.00 m a way (the
near p oint), so tha t the p erson c an see it cle arly . An ima ge 1.00 m from the e ye will b e
from the e yeglas s lens b ecause the e yeglas s lens is 1.5 cm from the e ye. Theref ore,
, where the minus sign indic ates tha t the ima ge is on the same side o f the lens as the object . The
object is from the e yeglas s lens , so .
Solution
Sinc e and are kno wn, we can find the optic al power o f the e yeglas s lens b y using Equa tion 2.24 :2.5 • The Ey e 85

Significanc e
The p ositiv e optic al power indic ates a c onverging (c onvex) lens , as e xpecte d. If y ou e xamine e yeglas ses o f
farsighte d people , you will find the lenses to b e thick est in the c enter . In addition , prescription e yeglas ses f or
farsighte d people ha ve a prescrib ed optic al power tha t is p ositiv e.
2.6The C amer a
Learning Objectiv es
By the end o f this section, y ou wil l be able t o:
•Describe the op tics o f a camer a
•Char acteriz e the image cr eated b y a camer a
Cameras are v ery common in our ev eryday life. Betw een 1825 and 1827, F rench in ventor Nic éphore Niép ce
successfully photographe d an ima ge cre ated by a primitiv e camera. Sinc e then , enormous progres s has b een
achiev ed in the design o f cameras and c amera-b ased detectors .
Initially , photographs w ere rec orde d by using the light -sensitiv e re action o f silv er-based comp ounds such as
silver chloride or silv er bromide . Silv er-based photographic p aper w as in c ommon use until the adv ent o f
digital photograph y in the 1980s , which is intima tely c onnecte d to char ge-couple d de vice (C CD) detectors . In
a nutshell , a C CD is a semic onductor chip tha t rec ords ima ges as a ma trix o f tin y pix els, each pix el lo cated in a
“bin ” in the sur face. Each pix el is c apable o f detecting the intensity o f light impinging on it . Color is brought
into pla y by put ting re d-, blue -, and green-c olore d filters o ver the pix els, resulting in c olore d digital ima ges
(Figure 2.34 ). At its b est resolution , one C CD pix el corresp onds to one pix el of the ima ge. To re duce the
resolution and decre ase the siz e of the file , we can “bin ” sev eral C CD pix els into one , resulting in a smaller but
“pix elated” ima ge.
Figur e2.34 A char ge-coupled de vice (CCD) c onverts light signals int o electr onic signals , enabling electr onic pr ocessing and s torage of
visual imag es. This is the basis f or electr onic imaging in al l digital camer as, from c ell phones t o mo vie camer as. (credit left: modification o f
work b y Bruc e Turner)
Clearly , electronics is a big p art of a digital c amera; ho wever, the underlying ph ysics is b asic optics . As a ma tter
of fact , the optics o f a c amera are pret ty much the same as those o f a single lens with an object dis tanc e tha t is
signific antly larg er than the lens’ s focal dis tanc e (Figure 2.35 ).86 2 • Geome tric Op tics and Image F ormation
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Figur e2.35 Modern digital camer as ha ve se veral lenses t o produc e a clear imag e with minimal aberr ation and use r ed, blue , and gr een
filters t o produc e a c olor imag e.
For ins tanc e, let us c onsider the c amera in a smar tphone . An a verage smar tphone c amera is e quipp ed with a
stationar y wide -angle lens with a f ocal length o f about 4–5 mm . (This f ocal length is a bout e qual to the
thicknes s of the phone .) The ima ge cre ated by the lens is f ocuse d on the C CD detector mounte d at the opp osite
side o f the phone . In a c ell phone , the lens and the C CD c annot mo ve rela tive to e ach other . So ho w do w e mak e
sure tha t both the ima ges o f a dis tant and a close object are in f ocus?
Recall tha t a human e ye can ac commo date for dis tant and close ima ges b y changing its f ocal dis tanc e. A c ell
phone c amera c annot do tha t because the dis tanc e from the lens to the detector is fix ed. Here is where the
small f ocal dis tanc e becomes imp ortant . Let us as sume w e ha ve a c amera with a 5-mm f ocal dis tanc e. Wha t is
the ima ge dis tanc e for a selfie? The object dis tanc e for a selfie (the length o f the hand holding the phone) is
about 50 cm . Using the thin-lens e qua tion , we can write
We then obtain the ima ge dis tanc e:
Note tha t the object dis tanc e is 100 times larg er than the f ocal dis tanc e. We can cle arly see tha t the 1/(500 mm)
term is signific antly smaller than 1/(5 mm), which me ans tha t the ima ge dis tanc e is pret ty much e qual to the
lens’ s focal length . An actual c alcula tion giv es us the ima ge dis tanc e . This v alue is e xtremely
close to the lens’ s focal dis tanc e.
Now let us c onsider the c ase o f a dis tant object . Let us sa y tha t we would lik e to tak e a picture o f a p erson
standing a bout 5 m from us . Using the thin-lens e qua tion a gain, we obtain the ima ge dis tanc e of 5.005 mm .
The far ther the object is from the lens , the closer the ima ge dis tanc e is to the f ocal dis tanc e. At the limiting
case o f an infinitely dis tant object , we obtain the ima ge dis tanc e exactly e qual to the f ocal dis tanc e of the lens .
As y ou c an see , the diff erenc e between the ima ge dis tanc e for a selfie and the ima ge dis tanc e for a dis tant
object is jus t about 0.05 mm or 50 microns . Even a shor t object dis tanc e such as the length o f your hand is tw o
orders o f ma gnitude larg er than the lens’ s focal length , resulting in minute v aria tions o f the ima ge dis tanc e.2.6 • The C amer a 87

(The 50-micron diff erenc e is smaller than the thicknes s of an a verage sheet o f paper.) Such a small diff erenc e
can b e easily ac commo dated by the same detector , positione d at the f ocal dis tanc e of the lens . Ima ge analy sis
software c an help impro ve ima ge quality .
Conventional p oint -and-sho ot cameras o ften use a mo vable lens to chang e the lens -to-ima ge dis tanc e.
Comple x lenses o f the more e xpensiv e mirror refle x cameras allo w for sup erb quality photographic ima ges.
The optics o f these c amera lenses is b eyond the sc ope of this te xtbook.
2.7The Simple Magnifier
Learning Objectiv es
By the end o f this section, y ou wil l be able t o:
•Under stand the op tics o f a simple magnifier
•Char acteriz e the image cr eated b y a simple magnifier
The app arent siz e of an object p erceived by the e ye dep ends on the angle the object subtends from the e ye. As
shown in Figure 2.36 , the object a tAsubtends a larg er angle from the e ye than when it is p osition a t point B.
Thus , the object a tAforms a larg er ima ge on the retina (see ) than when it is p ositione d atB(see ).
Thus , objects tha t subtend larg e angles from the e ye app ear larg er b ecause the y form larg er ima ges on the
retina.
Figur e2.36 Size per ceived b y an e ye is det ermined b y the angle sub tended b y the object. An imag e formed on the r etina b y an object at A
is lar ger than an imag e formed on the r etina b y the same object positioned at B(compar ed imag e heights to ).
We ha ve seen tha t, when an object is plac ed within a f ocal length o f a c onvex lens , its ima ge is vir tual , upright ,
and larg er than the object (see p art (b) ofFigure 2.26 ). Thus , when such an ima ge pro duced by a c onvex lens
serves as the object f or the e ye, as sho wn in Figure 2.37 , the ima ge on the retina is enlarg ed, because the ima ge
produced by the lens subtends a larg er angle in the e ye than do es the object . A c onvex lens use d for this
purp ose is c alled amagnif ying glas sor a simple ma gnifier .88 2 • Geome tric Op tics and Image F ormation
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Figur e2.37 The simple magnifier is a c onvex lens used t o produc e an enlar ged imag e of an object on the r etina . (a) With no c onvex lens ,
the object sub tends an angle from the e ye. (b) With the c onvex lens in plac e, the imag e produc ed b y the c onvex lens sub tends an
angle from the e ye, with . Thus , the imag e on the r etina is lar ger with the c onvex lens in plac e.
To ac count f or the ma gnific ation o f a ma gnif ying lens , we comp are the angle subtende d by the ima ge (cre ated
by the lens) with the angle subtende d by the object ( view ed with no lens), as sho wn in Figure 2.37 . We as sume
that the object is situa ted at the ne ar p oint o f the e ye, because this is the object dis tanc e at which the unaide d
eye can f orm the larg est ima ge on the retina. W e will c omp are the ma gnifie d ima ges cre ated by a lens with this
maximum ima ge siz e for the unaide d eye. The ma gnific ation o f an ima ge when obser ved by the e ye is the
angular ma gnific ation M, which is define d by the ra tio o f the angle subtende d by the ima ge to the angle
subtende d by the object:
Consider the situa tion sho wn in Figure 2.37 . The ma gnif ying lens is held a dis tanc elfrom the e ye, and the
ima ge pro duced by the ma gnifier f orms a dis tanc eLfrom the e ye. We want to c alcula te the angular
magnific ation f or an y arbitrar yLand l. In the small-angle appro xima tion , the angular siz e of the ima ge
is . The angular siz e of the object a t the ne ar p oint is . The angular ma gnific ation
is then2.26
2.272.7 • The Simple Magnifier 89

Using Equa tion 2.8 for line ar ma gnific ation
and the thin-lens e qua tion
inEqua tion 2.27 , we arriv e at the f ollowing e xpres sion f or the angular ma gnific ation o f a ma gnif ying lens:
From p art (b) of the figure , we see tha t the a bsolute v alue o f the ima ge dis tanc e is l. Note tha t
because the ima ge is vir tual , so w e can disp ense with the a bsolute v alue b y explicitly inser ting the
minus sign: l. Inser ting this into Equa tion 2.28 gives us the final e qua tion f or the angular
magnific ation o f a ma gnif ying lens:
Note tha t all the quantities in this e qua tion ha ve to b e expres sed in c entimeters . Often , we want the ima ge to b e
at the ne ar-point dis tanc e ( ) to g et maximum ma gnific ation , and w e hold the ma gnif ying lens close
to the e ye (l ). In this c ase,Equa tion 2.29 gives
which sho ws tha t the gre atest ma gnific ation o ccurs f or the lens with the shor test focal length . In addition ,
when the ima ge is a t the ne ar-point dis tanc e and the lens is held close to the e yel , then
and Equa tion 2.27 becomes
where mis the line ar ma gnific ation ( Equa tion 2.32 ) deriv ed for spheric al mirrors and thin lenses . Another
useful situa tion is when the ima ge is a t infinity .Equa tion 2.29 then tak es the f orm
The resulting ma gnific ation is simply the ra tio o f the ne ar-point dis tanc e to the f ocal length o f the ma gnif ying
lens , so a lens with a shor ter f ocal length giv es a s trong er ma gnific ation . Although this ma gnific ation is smaller
by 1 than the ma gnific ation obtaine d with the ima ge at the ne ar p oint , it pro vides f or the mos t comf ortable
viewing c onditions , because the e ye is relax ed when viewing a dis tant object .
By comp aring Equa tion 2.29 with Equa tion 2.32 , we see tha t the rang e of angular ma gnific ation o f a giv en
converging lens is2.28
l
2.29
2.30
2.31
2.32
2.3390 2 • Geome tric Op tics and Image F ormation
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

EXAMPLE 2.10
Magnif ying a Diamond
A jew eler wishes to insp ect a 3.0-mm-diameter diamond with a ma gnifier . The diamond is held a t the jew eler ’s
near p oint (25 cm), and the jew eler holds the ma gnif ying lens close to his e ye.
(a) Wha t should the f ocal length o f the ma gnif ying lens b e to see a 15-mm-diameter ima ge of the diamond?
(b) Wha t should the f ocal length o f the ma gnif ying lens b e to obtain magnific ation?
Strategy
We nee d to determine the re quisite ma gnific ation o f the ma gnifier . Bec ause the jew eler holds the ma gnif ying
lens close to his e ye, we can use Equa tion 2.30 to find the f ocal length o f the ma gnif ying lens .
Solution
a.The re quire d line ar ma gnific ation is the ra tio o f the desire d ima ge diameter to the diamond ’s actual
diameter ( Equa tion 2.32 ). Bec ause the jew eler holds the ma gnif ying lens close to his e ye and the ima ge
forms a t his ne ar p oint , the line ar ma gnific ation is the same as the angular ma gnific ation , so
The f ocal length fof the ma gnif ying lens ma y be calcula ted by solving Equa tion 2.30 forf, which giv es
b.To get an ima ge ma gnifie d by a factor o f ten , we again solv eEqua tion 2.30 forf, but this time w e use
. The result is
Significanc e
Note tha t a gre ater ma gnific ation is achiev ed by using a lens with a smaller f ocal length . We thus nee d to use a
lens with radii o f cur vature tha t are les s than a f ew c entimeters and hold it v ery close to our e ye. This is not
very convenient . A c omp ound microsc ope, explore d in the f ollowing section , can o vercome this dra wback.
2.8Microscopes and T elescopes
Learning Objectiv es
By the end o f this section, y ou wil l be able t o:
•Explain the phy sics behind the oper ation o f micr oscopes and telescopes
•Describe the image cr eated b y these ins truments and calculate their magnifications
Microsc opes and telesc opes are major ins truments tha t ha ve contribute d hug ely to our current unders tanding
of the micro - and macrosc opic w orlds . The in vention o f these devic es le d to numerous disc overies in
disciplines such as ph ysics , astronom y, and biolog y, to name a f ew. In this section , we explain the b asic ph ysics
that mak e these ins truments w ork.
Microscopes
Although the e ye is mar velous in its a bility to see objects larg e and small , it ob viously is limite d in the smalles t
details it c an detect . The desire to see b eyond wha t is p ossible with the nak ed eye led to the use o f optic al
instruments . We ha ve seen tha t a simple c onvex lens c an cre ate a ma gnifie d ima ge, but it is hard to g et larg e
magnific ation with such a lens . A ma gnific ation gre ater than is difficult without dis torting the ima ge. To
get higher ma gnific ation , we can c ombine the simple ma gnif ying glas s with one or more additional lenses . In
this section , we examine microsc opes tha t enlarg e the details tha t we cannot see with the nak ed eye.2.8 • Micr oscopes and T elescopes 91

Microsc opes w ere firs t dev elop ed in the e arly 1600s b y eyeglas s mak ers in The N etherlands and Denmark . The
simples tcomp ound microsc opeis constructe d from tw o convex lenses ( Figure 2.38 ). The object ivelens is a
convex lens o f shor t focal length (i .e., high p ower) with typic al ma gnific ation from to . The
eyepiec e, also ref erre d to as the o cular , is a c onvex lens o f long er focal length .
The purp ose o f a microsc ope is to cre ate ma gnifie d ima ges o f small objects , and b oth lenses c ontribute to the
final ma gnific ation . Also, the final enlarg ed ima ge is pro duced sufficiently far from the obser ver to b e easily
view ed, sinc e the e ye cannot f ocus on objects or ima ges tha t are to o close (i .e., closer than the ne ar p oint o f the
eye).
Figur e2.38 A compound micr oscope is c omposed o f two lenses: an objectiv e and an e yepiec e. The objectiv e forms the firs t imag e, which
is lar ger than the object. This firs t imag e is inside the f ocal length o f the e yepiec e and ser ves as the object f or the e yepiec e. The e yepiec e
forms the final imag e that is fur ther magnified. The d oand d ishown wil l be discus sed with superscrip ts "obj" belo w to denot e the y are
measur ed fr om the objectiv e lens , while the e ye piec e variables wil l have superscrip ts of "eye" to denot e this lens .
To see ho w the microsc ope in Figure 2.38 forms an ima ge, consider its tw o lenses in suc cession . The object is
just beyond the f ocal length of the objectiv e lens , pro ducing a re al, inverted ima ge tha t is larg er than the
object . This firs t ima ge ser ves as the object f or the sec ond lens , or e yepiec e. The e yepiec e is p ositione d so tha t
the firs t ima ge is within its f ocal length , so tha t it c an fur ther ma gnif y the ima ge. In a sense , it acts as a
magnif ying glas s tha t ma gnifies the interme diate ima ge pro duced by the objectiv e. The ima ge pro duced by the
eyepiec e is a ma gnifie d vir tual ima ge. The final ima ge remains in verted but is far ther from the obser ver than
the object , making it e asy to view .
The e ye view s the vir tual ima ge cre ated by the e yepiec e, which ser ves as the object f or the lens in the e ye. The
virtual ima ge forme d by the e yepiec e is w ell outside the f ocal length o f the e ye, so the e ye forms a re al ima ge on
the retina.
The ma gnific ation o f the microsc ope is the pro duct o f the line ar ma gnific ation by the objectiv e and the
angular ma gnific ation by the e yepiec e. These are giv en b y92 2 • Geome tric Op tics and Image F ormation
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Here , and are the f ocal lengths o f the objectiv e and the e yepiec e, resp ectiv ely. We as sume tha t the
final ima ge is f orme d at the ne ar p oint o f the e ye, pro viding the larg est ma gnific ation . Note tha t the angular
magnific ation o f the e yepiec e is the same as obtaine d earlier f or the simple ma gnif ying glas s. This should not
be surprising , because the e yepiec e is es sentially a ma gnif ying glas s, and the same ph ysics applies here . The
net ma gnific ation of the c omp ound microsc ope is the pro duct o f the line ar ma gnific ation o f the
objectiv e and the angular ma gnific ation o f the e yepiec e:
EXAMPLE 2.11
Micr oscope Magnifica tion
Calcula te the ma gnific ation o f an object plac ed 6.20 mm from a c omp ound microsc ope tha t has a 6.00 mm-
focal length objectiv e and a 50.0 mm-f ocal length e yepiec e. The objectiv e and e yepiec e are sep arated by 23.0
cm.
Strategy
This situa tion is similar to tha t sho wn in Figure 2.38 . To find the o verall ma gnific ation , we mus t kno w the
line ar ma gnific ation o f the objectiv e and the angular ma gnific ation o f the e yepiec e. We can use Equa tion 2.34 ,
but w e nee d to use the thin-lens e qua tion to find the ima ge dis tanc e of the objectiv e.
Solution
Solving the thin-lens e qua tion f or gives
Inser ting this result into Equa tion 2.34 along with the kno wn v alues and
gives
Significanc e
Both the objectiv e and the e yepiec e contribute to the o verall ma gnific ation , which is larg e and neg ative,
consis tent with Figure 2.38 , where the ima ge is seen to b e larg e and in verted. In this c ase, the ima ge is vir tual
and in verted, which c annot happ en f or a single element (see Figure 2.26 ).2.342.8 • Micr oscopes and T elescopes 93

Figur e2.39 A compound micr oscope with the imag e created at infinity .
We no w calcula te the ma gnif ying p ower o f a microsc ope when the ima ge is a t infinity , as sho wn in Figure 2.39 ,
because this mak es for the mos t relax ed viewing . The ma gnif ying p ower o f the microsc ope is the pro duct o f
line ar ma gnific ation of the objectiv e and the angular ma gnific ation of the e yepiec e. The
magnific ation o f the objectiv e can b e obtaine d from the thin-lens e qua tion f or ma gnific ation , which is
If the final ima ge is a t infinity , then the ima ge cre ated by the objectiv e mus t be located at the f ocal point o f the
eyepiec e. This ma y be seen b y considering the thin-lens e qua tion with or b y rec alling tha t rays tha t
pass through the f ocal point e xit the lens p arallel to e ach other , which is e quiv alent to f ocusing a t infinity . For
man y microsc opes, the dis tanc e between the ima ge-side f ocal point o f the objectiv e and the object -side f ocal
point o f the e yepiec e is s tandardiz ed at . This dis tanc e is c alled the tub e length o f the microsc ope. If
the length o f the c omp ound microsc opeLis roughly the f ocal length o f the objectiv e, we can subs titute Lin for
diobjto get
We no w nee d to c alcula te the angular ma gnific ation o f the e yepiec e with the ima ge at infinity . To do so , we tak e
the ra tio o f the angle subtende d by the ima ge to the angle subtende d by the object a t the ne ar
point o f the e ye (this is the closes t tha t the unaide d eye can view the object , and thus this is the p osition where
the object will f orm the larg est ima ge on the retina o f the unaide d eye). U sing Figure 2.39 and w orking in the
small-angle appro xima tion , we ha ve and , where is the height o f
the ima ge forme d by the objectiv e, which is the object o f the e yepiec e. Thus , the angular ma gnific ation o f the
eyepiec e is
The net ma gnif ying p ower o f the c omp ound microsc ope with the ima ge at infinity is theref ore2.35
2.36
2.3794 2 • Geome tric Op tics and Image F ormation
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

The f ocal dis tanc es mus t be in c entimeters . The minus sign indic ates tha t the final ima ge is in verted. Note tha t
the only v aria bles in the e qua tion are the f ocal dis tanc es o f the e yepiec e and the objectiv e, which mak es this
equa tion p articularly useful .
Telescopes
Telesc opes are me ant f or viewing dis tant objects and pro duce an ima ge tha t is larg er than the ima ge pro duced
in the unaide d eye. Telesc opes g ather far more light than the e ye, allo wing dim objects to b e obser ved with
greater ma gnific ation and b etter resolution . Telesc opes w ere in vente d around 1600, and Galileo was the firs t
to use them to s tudy the he avens, with monumental c onse quenc es. He obser ved the mo ons o f Jupiter , the
craters and mountains on the mo on, the details o f sunsp ots, and the fact tha t the Milky W ay is c omp osed of a
vast numb er o f individual s tars .
Figur e2.40 (a) Galileo made t elesc opes with a c onvex objectiv e and a c onca ve eyepiec e. These pr oduc e an upright imag e and ar e used in
spyglas ses. (b) Mos t simple r efracting t elesc opes ha ve tw o convex lenses . The objectiv e forms a r eal, inverted imag e at (or jus t within) the
focal plane o f the e yepiec e. This imag e ser ves as the object f or the e yepiec e. The e yepiec e forms a vir tual, inverted imag e that is magnified.
Part (a) o fFigure 2.40 shows a refracting telesc ope made o f two lenses . The firs t lens , called the objectiv e,2.382.8 • Micr oscopes and T elescopes 95

forms a re al ima ge within the f ocal length o f the sec ond lens , which is c alled the eyepiec e. The ima ge of the
objectiv e lens ser ves as the object f or the e yepiec e, which f orms a ma gnifie d vir tual ima ge tha t is obser ved by
the e ye. This design is wha t Galileo use d to obser ve the he avens.
Although the arrang ement o f the lenses in a refracting telesc ope looks similar to tha t in a microsc ope, there
are imp ortant diff erenc es. In a telesc ope, the re al object is far a way and the interme diate ima ge is smaller than
the object . In a microsc ope, the re al object is v ery close and the interme diate ima ge is larg er than the object . In
both the telesc ope and the microsc ope, the e yepiec e ma gnifies the interme diate ima ge; in the telesc ope,
however, this is the only ma gnific ation .
The mos t common tw o-lens telesc ope is sho wn in p art (b) of the figure . The object is so far from the telesc ope
that it is es sentially a t infinity c omp ared with the f ocal lengths o f the lenses , so the inc oming ra ys
are es sentially p arallel and f ocus on the f ocal plane . Thus , the firs t ima ge is pro duced at , as sho wn
in the figure , and is not larg e comp ared with wha t you might see b y looking directly a t the object . Ho wever, the
eyepiec e of the telesc ope eyepiec e (like the microsc ope eyepiec e) allo ws you to g et ne arer than y our ne ar p oint
to this firs t ima ge and so ma gnifies it ( because y ou are ne ar to it , it subtends a larg er angle from y our e ye and
so forms a larg er ima ge on y our retina). As f or a simple ma gnifier , the angular ma gnific ation o f a telesc ope is
the ra tio o f the angle subtende d by the ima ge [ in p art (b)] to the angle subtende d by the re al object
[ in p art (b)]:
To obtain an e xpres sion f or the ma gnific ation tha t involves only the lens p arameters , note tha t the f ocal plane
of the objectiv e lens lies v ery close to the f ocal plan o f the e yepiec e. If w e as sume tha t these planes are
superposed, we ha ve the situa tion sho wn in Figure 2.41 .
Figur e2.41 The f ocal plane o f the objectiv e lens o f a telesc ope is v ery near t o the f ocal plane o f the e yepiec e. The angle
subtended b y the imag e vie wed thr ough the e yepiec e is lar ger than the angle subtended b y the object when vie wed with the
unaided e ye.
We fur ther as sume tha t the angles and are small , so tha t the small-angle appro xima tion holds
( ). If the ima ge forme d at the f ocal plane has height h, then
where the minus sign is intro duced because the height is neg ative if w e me asure b oth angles in the2.3996 2 • Geome tric Op tics and Image F ormation
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

counterclo ckwise direction . Inser ting these e xpres sions into Equa tion 2.39 gives
Thus , to obtain the gre atest angular ma gnific ation , it is b est to ha ve an objectiv e with a long f ocal length and an
eyepiec e with a shor t focal length . The gre ater the angular ma gnific ation M, the larg er an object will app ear
when view ed through a telesc ope, making more details visible . Limits to obser vable details are imp osed by
man y factors , including lens quality and a tmospheric dis turb ance. Typic al eyepiec es ha ve focal lengths o f 2.5
cm or 1.25 cm . If the objectiv e of the telesc ope has a f ocal length o f 1 meter , then these e yepiec es result in
magnific ations o f and , resp ectiv ely. Thus , the angular ma gnific ations mak e the ima ge app ear 40
times or 80 times closer than the re al object .
The minus sign in the ma gnific ation indic ates the ima ge is in verted, which is unimp ortant f or obser ving the
stars but is a re al problem f or other applic ations , such as telesc opes on ships or telesc opic gun sights . If an
upright ima ge is nee ded, Galileo ’s arrang ement in p art (a) o fFigure 2.40 can b e use d. But a more c ommon
arrang ement is to use a third c onvex lens as an e yepiec e, incre asing the dis tanc e between the firs t two and
inverting the ima ge onc e again, as seen in Figure 2.42 .
Figur e2.42 This arr angement o f thr ee lenses in a t elesc ope pr oduc es an upright final imag e. The firs t two lenses ar e far enough apar t
that the sec ond lens in verts the imag e of the firs t. The thir d lens acts as a magnifier and k eeps the imag e upright and in a location that is
easy to vie w.
The larg est refracting telesc ope in the w orld is the 40-inch diameter Y erkes telesc ope located at Lak e Genev a,
Wisconsin ( Figure 2.43 ), and op erated by the Univ ersity o f Chic ago.
It is v ery difficult and e xpensiv e to build larg e refracting telesc opes. You nee d larg e def ect-free lenses , which in
itself is a technic ally demanding task . A refracting telesc ope basic ally lo oks lik e a tub e with a supp ort
structure to rota te it in diff erent directions . A refracting telesc ope suff ers from sev eral problems . The
aberra tion o f lenses c auses the ima ge to b e blurre d. Also, as the lenses b ecome thick er for larg er lenses , more
light is a bsorb ed, making faint s tars more difficult to obser ve. Larg e lenses are also v ery he avy and def orm
under their o wn w eight . Some o f these problems with refracting telesc opes are addres sed by avoiding
refraction f or c ollecting light and ins tead using a cur ved mirror in its plac e, as devise d by Isaac N ewton . These
telesc opes are c alled reflecting telesc opes.2.402.8 • Micr oscopes and T elescopes 97

Figur e2.43 In 1897, the Y erkes Obser vatory in Wisc onsin (USA) buil t a lar ge refracting t elesc ope with an objectiv e lens that is 40 inches
in diamet er and has a tube length o f 62 f eet. (cr edit: Y erkes Obser vatory, Univ ersity o f Chicag o)
Reflecting T elescopes
Isaac Newton designe d the firs t reflecting telesc ope around 1670 to solv e the problem o f chroma tic a berra tion
that happ ens in all refracting telesc opes. In chroma tic a berra tion , light o f diff erent c olors refracts b y slightly
different amounts in the lens . As a result , a rainb ow app ears around the ima ge and the ima ge app ears blurre d.
In the reflecting telesc ope, light ra ys from a dis tant sourc e fall up on the sur face of a c oncave mirror fix ed at the
bottom end o f the tub e. The use o f a mirror ins tead o f a lens elimina tes chroma tic a berra tion . The c oncave
mirror f ocuses the ra ys on its f ocal plane . The design problem is ho w to obser ve the f ocuse d ima ge. Newton
used a design in which the f ocuse d light from the c oncave mirror w as reflecte d to one side o f the tub e into an
eyepiec e [part (a) o fFigure 2.44 ]. This arrang ement is c ommon in man y ama teur telesc opes and is c alled the
Newtonian design .
Some telesc opes reflect the light b ack to ward the middle o f the c oncave mirror using a c onvex mirror . In this
arrang ement , the light -gathering c oncave mirror has a hole in the middle [p art (b) of the figure]. The light then
is incident on an e yepiec e lens . This arrang ement o f the objectiv e and e yepiec e is c alled the Cassegrain
design . Mos t big telesc opes, including the Hubble sp ace telesc ope, are o f this design . Other arrang ements are
also p ossible . In some telesc opes, a light detector is plac ed right a t the sp ot where light is f ocuse d by the
curved mirror .
Figur e2.44 Reflecting t elesc opes: (a) In the Ne wtonian design, the e yepiec e is locat ed at the side o f the t elesc ope; (b) in the Cas segr ain
design, the e yepiec e is locat ed pas t a hole in the primar y mirr or.
Mos t astronomic al rese arch telesc opes are no w of the reflecting typ e. One o f the e arlies t larg e telesc opes o f98 2 • Geome tric Op tics and Image F ormation
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

this kind is the Hale 200-inch (or 5-meter) telesc ope built on Mount P alomar in southern C alifornia, which has
a 200 inch-diameter mirror . One o f the larg est telesc opes in the w orld is the 10-meter Keck telesc opeat the
Keck Obser vatory on the summit o f the dormant Ma una K ea volcano in Ha waii. The K eck Obser vatory op erates
two 10-meter telesc opes. Each is not a single mirror , but is ins tead made up o f 36 he xagonal mirrors .
Furthermore , the tw o telesc opes on the K eck c an w ork tog ether , which incre ases their p ower to an eff ectiv e
85-meter mirror . The Hubble telesc ope(Figure 2.45 ) is another larg e reflecting telesc ope with a 2.4 meter -
diameter primar y mirror . The Hubble w as put into orbit around Ear th in 1990.
Figur e2.45 The Hubble spac e telesc ope as seen fr om the Spac e Shut tle Disc overy. (credit: modification o f work b y NASA)
The angular ma gnific ation Mof a reflecting telesc ope is also giv en b yEqua tion 2.36 . For a spheric al mirror , the
focal length is half the radius o f cur vature , so making a larg e objectiv e mirror not only helps the telesc ope
collect more light but also incre ases the ma gnific ation o f the ima ge.2.8 • Micr oscopes and T elescopes 99

CHAP TER RE VIEW
Key Terms
aberrat ion distortion in an ima ge caused by
dep artures from the small-angle appro xima tion
accommo dation use o f the ciliar y muscles to
adjus t the shap e of the e ye lens f or focusing on
near or far objects
angular ma gnific ation ratio o f the angle
subtende d by an object obser ved with a ma gnifier
to tha t obser ved by the nak ed eye
app arent depth depth a t which an object is
perceived to b e located with resp ect to an
inter face between tw o me dia
Cassegrain design arrang ement o f an objectiv e
and e yepiec e such tha t the light -gathering
concave mirror has a hole in the middle , and light
then is incident on an e yepiec e lens
char ge-couple d de vice (C CD) semic onductor chip
that converts a light ima ge into tin y pix els tha t
can b e converted into electronic signals o f color
and intensity
coma similar to spheric al aberra tion , but arises
when the inc oming ra ys are not p arallel to the
optic al axis
comp ound microsc opemicrosc ope constructe d
from tw o convex lenses , the firs t ser ving as the
eyepiec e and the sec ond ser ving as the objectiv e
lens
conc ave mirror spheric al mirror with its reflecting
surface on the inner side o f the sphere; the mirror
forms a “ cave”
converging (or c onvex) lens lens in which light
rays tha t enter it p arallel c onverge into a single
point on the opp osite side
convex mirror spheric al mirror with its reflecting
surface on the outer side o f the sphere
curved mirror mirror f orme d by a cur ved sur face,
such as spheric al, elliptic al, or p arabolic
diverging (or c onc ave) lens lens tha t causes light
rays to b end a way from its optic al axis
eyepiec elens or c ombina tion o f lenses in an
optic al ins trument ne ares t to the e ye of the
obser ver
far p oint furthes t point an e ye can see in f ocus
farsighte dnes s (or h yperopia) visual def ect in
which ne ar objects app ear blurre d because their
ima ges are f ocuse d behind the retina ra ther than
on the retina; a farsighte d person c an see far
objects cle arly but ne ar objects app ear blurre d
first focus or object f ocus object lo cated at this
point will result in an ima ge cre ated at infinity on
the opp osite side o f a spheric al inter face betweentwo me dia
focal length distanc e along the optic al axis from
the f ocal point to the optic al element tha t focuses
the light ra ys
focal plane plane tha t contains the f ocal point and
is perpendicular to the optic al axis
focal p oint for a c onverging lens or mirror , the
point a t which c onverging light ra ys cros s; for a
diverging lens or mirror , the p oint from which
diverging light ra ys app ear to origina te
ima ge dis tanc edistanc e of the ima ge from the
central axis o f the optic al element tha t pro duces
the ima ge
line ar ma gnific ation ratio o f ima ge height to
object height
magnific ation ratio o f ima ge siz e to object siz e
near p oint closes t point an e ye can see in f ocus
nearsighte dnes s (or m yopia) visual def ect in
which far objects app ear blurre d because their
ima ges are f ocuse d in front o f the retina ra ther
than on the retina; a ne arsighte d person c an see
near objects cle arly but far objects app ear
blurre d
net ma gnific ation ( ) of the c omp ound
microsc ope is the pro duct o f the line ar
magnific ation o f the objectiv e and the angular
magnific ation o f the e yepiec e
Newtonian design arrang ement o f an objectiv e
and e yepiec e such tha t the f ocuse d light from the
concave mirror w as reflecte d to one side o f the
tube into an e yepiec e
object dis tanc edistanc e of the object from the
central axis o f the optic al element tha t pro duces
its ima ge
object ivelens ne ares t to the object b eing
examine d.
optical axis axis a bout which the mirror is
rota tionally s ymmetric; y ou c an rota te the mirror
about this axis without changing an ything
optical p ower (P) inverse o f the f ocal length o f a
lens , with the f ocal length e xpres sed in meters .
The optic al powerPof a lens is e xpres sed in units
of diopters D; tha t is,
plane mirror plane (fla t) reflecting sur face
ray tracing technique tha t uses g eometric
constructions to find and characteriz e the ima ge
forme d by an optic al system
real ima geima ge tha t can b e projecte d onto a
screen b ecause the ra ys ph ysically g o through the
ima ge100 2 • Chap ter Re view
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

second f ocus or ima ge focus for a c onverging
inter face, the p oint where a bundle o f parallel
rays refracting a t a spheric al inter face; for a
diverging inter face, the p oint a t which the
backw ard c ontinua tion o f the refracte d ra ys will
converge between tw o me dia will f ocus
simple ma gnifier (or ma gnif ying glas s)
converging lens tha t pro duces a vir tual ima ge of
an object tha t is within the f ocal length o f the lens
small-angle appro ximat ion appro xima tion tha t is
valid when the siz e of a spheric al mirror is
signific antly smaller than the mirror ’s radius; in
this appro xima tion , spheric al aberra tion isnegligible and the mirror has a w ell-define d focal
point
spheric al ab errat ion distortion in the ima ge
forme d by a spheric al mirror when ra ys are not
all focuse d at the same p oint
thin-lens appro ximat ion assumption tha t the lens
is very thin c omp ared to the firs t ima ge dis tanc e
vertexpoint where the mirror ’s sur face intersects
with the optic al axis
virtual ima geima ge tha t cannot b e projecte d on a
screen b ecause the ra ys do not ph ysically g o
through the ima ge, the y only app ear to origina te
from the ima ge
Key Equations
Ima ge dis tanc e in a plane mirror
Focal length f or a spheric al mirror
Mirror e qua tion
Magnific ation o f a spheric al mirror
Sign c onvention f or mirrors
Focal length f
Object dis tanc edo
Ima ge dis tanc edi
Magnific ation m
Apparent depth e qua tion
Spheric al inter face equa tion
The thin-lens e qua tion
The lens mak er’s equa tion2 • Chap ter Re view 101

The ma gnific ation mof an object
Optic al power
Optic al power o f thin , closely sp aced lenses
Angular ma gnific ation Mof a simple ma gnifier
Angular ma gnific ation o f an object a dis tanc e
Lfrom the e ye for a c onvex lens o f focal length
fheld a dis tanc eℓfrom the e yel
Rang e of angular ma gnific ation f or a giv en
lens f or a p erson with a ne ar p oint o f 25 cm
Net ma gnific ation o f comp ound microsc ope
Summar y
2.1Images F ormed b y Plane Mirr ors
•A plane mirror alw ays forms a vir tual ima ge
(behind the mirror).
•The ima ge and object are the same dis tanc e
from a fla t mirror , the ima ge siz e is the same as
the object siz e, and the ima ge is upright .
2.2Spherical Mirr ors
•Spheric al mirrors ma y be concave (converging )
or c onvex (div erging ).
•The f ocal length o f a spheric al mirror is one -half
of its radius o f cur vature: .
•The mirror e qua tion and ra y tracing allo w you to
give a c omplete description o f an ima ge forme d
by a spheric al mirror .
•Spheric al aberra tion o ccurs f or spheric al
mirrors but not p arabolic mirrors; c oma tic
aberra tion o ccurs f or b oth typ es o f mirrors .
2.3Images F ormed b y Re fraction
This section e xplains ho w a single refracting
inter face forms ima ges.
•When an object is obser ved through a plane
inter face between tw o me dia, then it app ears a t
an app arent dis tanc e that diff ers from the
actual dis tanc e : .
•An ima ge is f orme d by the refraction o f light a t a
spheric al inter face between tw o me dia o findic es o f refraction and .
•Ima ge dis tanc e dep ends on the radius o f
curvature o f the inter face, location o f the object ,
and the indic es o f refraction o f the me dia.
2.4Thin L enses
•Two typ es o f lenses are p ossible: c onverging and
diverging . A lens tha t causes light ra ys to b end
toward (a way from) its optic al axis is a
converging (div erging ) lens .
•For a c onverging lens , the f ocal point is where
the c onverging light ra ys cros s; for a div erging
lens , the f ocal point is the p oint from which the
diverging light ra ys app ear to origina te.
•The dis tanc e from the c enter o f a thin lens to its
focal point is c alled the f ocal length f.
•Ray tracing is a g eometric technique to
determine the p aths tak en b y light ra ys through
thin lenses .
•A re al ima ge can b e projecte d onto a screen .
•A vir tual ima ge cannot b e projecte d onto a
screen .
•A converging lens f orms either re al or vir tual
ima ges, dep ending on the object lo cation; a
diverging lens f orms only vir tual ima ges.
2.5The Ey e
•Ima ge forma tion b y the e ye is ade qua tely
describ ed by the thin-lens e qua tion .
•The e ye pro duces a re al ima ge on the retina b y102 2 • Chap ter Re view
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

adjus ting its f ocal length in a pro cess called
accommo dation .
•Nearsighte dnes s, or m yopia, is the ina bility to
see far objects and is c orrecte d with a div erging
lens to re duce the optic al power o f the e ye.
•Farsighte dnes s, or h yperopia, is the ina bility to
see ne ar objects and is c orrecte d with a
converging lens to incre ase the optic al power o f
the e ye.
•In m yopia and h yperopia, the c orrectiv e lenses
produce ima ges a t dis tanc es tha t fall b etween
the p erson ’s ne ar and far p oints so tha t ima ges
can b e seen cle arly .
2.6The C amer a
•Cameras use c ombina tions o f lenses to cre ate
an ima ge for rec ording .
•Digital photograph y is b ased on charg e-couple d
devic es (C CDs) tha t bre ak an ima ge into tin y
“pix els” tha t can b e converted into electronic
signals .
2.7The Simple Magnifier
•A simple ma gnifier is a c onverging lens and
produces a ma gnifie d vir tual ima ge of an object
located within the f ocal length o f the lens .
•Angular ma gnific ation ac counts f or
magnific ation o f an ima ge cre ated by a
magnifier . It is e qual to the ra tio o f the angle
subtende d by the ima ge to tha t subtende d by the
object when the object is obser ved by the
unaide d eye.
•Angular ma gnific ation is gre ater f or ma gnif ying
lenses with smaller f ocal lengths .
•Simple ma gnifiers c an pro duce as gre at as
tenf old ( ) ma gnific ation .
2.8Microscopes and T elescopes
•Man y optic al devic es c ontain more than a single
lens or mirror . These are analyz ed by
considering e ach element se quentially . Theima ge forme d by the firs t is the object f or the
second , and so on . The same ra y-tracing and
thin-lens techniques dev elop ed in the previous
sections apply to e ach lens element .
•The o verall ma gnific ation o f a multiple -element
system is the pro duct o f the line ar
magnific ations o f its individual elements times
the angular ma gnific ation o f the e yepiec e. For a
two-element s ystem with an objectiv e and an
eyepiec e, this is
where is the line ar ma gnific ation o f the
objectiv e and is the angular ma gnific ation
of the e yepiec e.
•The microsc ope is a multiple -element s ystem
that contains more than a single lens or mirror .
It allo ws us to see detail tha t we could not to see
with the unaide d eye. Both the e yepiec e and
objectiv e contribute to the ma gnific ation . The
magnific ation o f a c omp ound microsc ope with
the ima ge at infinity is
In this e qua tion , 16 cm is the s tandardiz ed
distanc e between the ima ge-side f ocal point o f
the objectiv e lens and the object -side f ocal point
of the e yepiec e, 25 cm is the normal ne ar p oint
distanc e, and are the f ocal dis tanc es
for the objectiv e lens and the e yepiec e,
resp ectiv ely.
•Simple telesc opes c an b e made with tw o lenses .
The y are use d for viewing objects a t larg e
distanc es.
•The angular ma gnific ation Mfor a telesc ope is
given b y
where and are the f ocal lengths o f the
objectiv e lens and the e yepiec e, resp ectiv ely.
Concep tual Ques tions
2.1Images F ormed b y Plane Mirr ors
1.Wha t are the diff erenc es b etween re al and vir tual
ima ges? Ho w can y ou tell ( by looking ) whether an
ima ge forme d by a single lens or mirror is re al or
virtual?
2.Can y ou see a vir tual ima ge? Explain y our
resp onse .
3.Can y ou photograph a vir tual ima ge?
4.Can y ou project a vir tual ima ge onto a screen?5.Is it nec essary to project a re al ima ge onto a
screen to see it?
6.Devise an arrang ement o f mirrors allo wing y ou to
see the b ack o f your he ad. Wha t is the minimum
numb er o f mirrors nee ded for this task?
7.If you wish to see y our entire b ody in a fla t mirror
(from he ad to to e), ho w tall should the mirror b e?
Does its siz e dep end up on y our dis tanc e away
from the mirror? P rovide a sk etch .2.41
2.42
2.432 • Chap ter Re view 103

2.2Spherical Mirr ors
8.At wha t dis tanc e is an ima ge alw ays located: at
orf?
9.Under wha t circums tanc es will an ima ge be
located at the f ocal point o f a spheric al lens or
mirror?
10.Wha t is me ant b y a neg ative ma gnific ation?
Wha t is me ant b y a ma gnific ation whose
absolute v alue is les s than one?
11.Can an ima ge be larg er than the object ev en
though its ma gnific ation is neg ative? Explain .
2.3Images F ormed b y Re fraction
12.Deriv e the f ormula f or the app arent depth o f a
fish in a fish tank using Snell ’s law.
13.Use a r uler and a protractor to find the ima ge by
refraction in the f ollowing c ases . Assume an air -
glas s inter face. Use a refractiv e inde x of 1 f or air
and o f 1.5 f or glas s. (Hint : Use Snell ’s law at the
inter face.)
(a) A p oint object lo cated on the axis o f a
concave inter face located at a p oint within the
focal length from the v ertex.
(b) A p oint object lo cated on the axis o f a
concave inter face located at a p oint far ther than
the f ocal length from the v ertex.
(c) A p oint object lo cated on the axis o f a c onvex
inter face located at a p oint within the f ocal
length from the v ertex.
(d) A p oint object lo cated on the axis o f a c onvex
inter face located at a p oint far ther than the
focal length from the v ertex.
(e) R epeat (a)–(d) f or a p oint object o ff the axis .
2.4Thin L enses
14.You c an argue tha t a fla t piec e of glas s, such as
in a windo w, is lik e a lens with an infinite f ocal
length . If so , where do es it f orm an ima ge? Tha t
is, how are and rela ted?
15.When y ou f ocus a c amera, y ou adjus t the
distanc e of the lens from the film . If the c amera
lens acts lik e a thin lens , wh y can it not b e a
fixed dis tanc e from the film f or b oth ne ar and
distant objects?
16.A thin lens has tw o focal points , one on eitherside o f the lens a t equal dis tanc es from its
center , and should b ehave the same f or light
entering from either side . Look b ackw ard and
forward through a p air o f eyeglas ses and
comment on whether the y are thin lenses .
17.Will the f ocal length o f a lens chang e when it is
submerg ed in w ater? Explain .
2.5The Ey e
18.If the lens o f a p erson ’s eye is remo ved because
of cataracts (as has b een done sinc e ancient
times), wh y would y ou e xpect an e yeglas s lens
of about 16 D to b e prescrib ed?
19.When laser light is shone into a relax ed normal-
vision e ye to rep air a te ar b y sp ot-welding the
retina to the b ack o f the e ye, the ra ys entering
the e ye mus t be parallel . Wh y?
20.Why is y our vision so blurr y when y ou op en
your e yes while s wimming under w ater? Ho w
does a fac e mask ena ble cle ar vision?
21.It has b ecome c ommon to replac e the c ataract -
cloude d lens o f the e ye with an internal lens .
This intrao cular lens c an b e chosen so tha t the
person has p erfect dis tant vision . Will the
person b e able to re ad without glas ses? If the
person w as ne arsighte d, is the p ower o f the
intrao cular lens gre ater or les s than the
remo ved lens?
22.If the c orne a is to b e reshap ed (this c an b e done
surgic ally or with c ontact lenses) to c orrect
myopia, should its cur vature b e made gre ater or
smaller? Explain .
2.8Microscopes and T elescopes
23.Geometric optics describ es the interaction o f
light with macrosc opic objects . Wh y, then , is it
correct to use g eometric optics to analyz e a
microsc ope’s ima ge?
24.The ima ge pro duced by the microsc ope in
Figure 2.38 cannot b e projecte d. Could e xtra
lenses or mirrors project it? Explain .
25.If you w ant y our microsc ope or telesc ope to
project a re al ima ge onto a screen , how w ould
you chang e the plac ement o f the e yepiec e
rela tive to the objectiv e?
Problems
2.1Images F ormed b y Plane Mirr ors
26.Consider a p air o f fla t mirrors tha t are
positione d so tha t the y form an angle o f 120 .An object is plac ed on the bisector b etween the
mirrors . Construct a ra y dia gram as in Figure
2.4to sho w ho w man y ima ges are f orme d.
27.Consider a p air o f fla t mirrors tha t are104 2 • Chap ter Re view
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

positione d so tha t the y form an angle o f 60 . An
object is plac ed on the bisector b etween the
mirrors . Construct a ra y dia gram as in Figure
2.4to sho w ho w man y ima ges are f orme d.
28.By using more than one fla t mirror , construct a
ray dia gram sho wing ho w to cre ate an in verted
ima ge.
2.2Spherical Mirr ors
29.The f ollowing figure sho ws a light bulb b etween
two spheric al mirrors . One mirror pro duces a
beam o f light with p arallel ra ys; the other k eeps
light from esc aping without b eing put into the
beam. Where is the filament o f the light in rela tion
to the f ocal point or radius o f cur vature o f each
mirror?
30.Why are div erging mirrors o ften use d for
rearview mirrors in v ehicles? Wha t is the main
disadv anta ge of using such a mirror c omp ared
with a fla t one?
31.Some telephoto c ameras use a mirror ra ther
than a lens . Wha t radius o f cur vature mirror is
needed to replac e a 800 mm-f ocal length
telephoto lens?
32.Calcula te the f ocal length o f a mirror f orme d by
the shin y back o f a sp oon tha t has a 3.00 cm
radius o f cur vature .
33.Electric ro om he aters use a c oncave mirror to
reflect infrare d (IR) radia tion from hot c oils.
Note tha t IR radia tion f ollows the same la w of
reflection as visible light . Giv en tha t the mirror
has a radius o f cur vature o f 50.0 cm and
produces an ima ge of the c oils 3.00 m a way
from the mirror , where are the c oils?
34.Find the ma gnific ation o f the he ater element in
the previous problem . Note tha t its larg e
magnitude helps spre ad out the reflecte d
energ y.
35.Wha t is the f ocal length o f a mak eup mirror tha t
produces a ma gnific ation o f 1.50 when aperson ’s fac e is 12.0 cm a way? Explicitly sho w
how you f ollow the s teps in the Example 2.2 .
36.A shopp er standing 3.00 m from a c onvex
security mirror sees his ima ge with a
magnific ation o f 0.250. (a) Where is his ima ge?
(b) Wha t is the f ocal length o f the mirror? (c)
Wha t is its radius o f cur vature?
37.An object 1.50 cm high is held 3.00 cm from a
person ’s corne a, and its reflecte d ima ge is
measure d to b e 0.167 cm high . (a) Wha t is the
magnific ation? ( b) Where is the ima ge? (c) F ind
the radius o f cur vature o f the c onvex mirror
forme d by the c orne a. (N ote tha t this technique
is use d by optometris ts to me asure the
curvature o f the c orne a for c ontact lens fit ting .
The ins trument use d is c alled a k eratometer , or
curve me asurer .)
38.Ray tracing f or a fla t mirror sho ws tha t the
ima ge is lo cated a dis tanc e behind the mirror
equal to the dis tanc e of the object from the
mirror . This is s tated as , sinc e this is a
negative ima ge dis tanc e (it is a vir tual ima ge).
Wha t is the f ocal length o f a fla t mirror?
39.Sho w tha t, for a fla t mirror , , giv en tha t
the ima ge is the same dis tanc e behind the
mirror as the dis tanc e of the object from the
mirror .
40.Use the la w of reflection to pro ve tha t the f ocal
length o f a mirror is half its radius o f cur vature .
Tha t is, pro ve tha t . Note this is tr ue for
a spheric al mirror only if its diameter is small
comp ared with its radius o f cur vature .
41.Referring to the electric ro om he ater c onsidere d
in problem 5, c alcula te the intensity o f IR
radia tion in projecte d by the c oncave
mirror on a p erson 3.00 m a way. Assume tha t
the he ating element radia tes 1500 W and has an
area of , and tha t half o f the radia ted
power is reflecte d and f ocuse d by the mirror .
42.Two mirrors are incline d at an angle o f 60 and
an object is plac ed at a p oint tha t is e quidis tant
from the tw o mirrors . Use a protractor to dra w
rays ac cura tely and lo cate all ima ges. You ma y
have to dra w sev eral figures so tha t tha t rays for
different ima ges do not clut ter y our dra wing .
43.Two parallel mirrors are facing e ach other and
are sep arated by a dis tanc e of 3 cm . A p oint
object is plac ed between the mirrors 1 cm from
one o f the mirrors . Find the c oordina tes o f all
the ima ges.
2.3Images F ormed b y Re fraction
44.An object is lo cated in air 30 cm from the v ertex2 • Chap ter Re view 105

of a c oncave sur face made o f glas s with a radius
of cur vature 10 cm . Where do es the ima ge by
refraction f orm and wha t is its ma gnific ation?
Use and .
45.An object is lo cated in air 30 cm from the v ertex
of a c onvex sur face made o f glas s with a radius
of cur vature 80 cm . Where do es the ima ge by
refraction f orm and wha t is its ma gnific ation?
46.An object is lo cated in w ater 15 cm from the
vertex of a c oncave sur face made o f glas s with a
radius o f cur vature 10 cm . Where do es the
ima ge by refraction f orm and wha t is its
magnific ation? U se and
.
47.An object is lo cated in w ater 30 cm from the
vertex of a c onvex sur face made o f Ple xiglas
with a radius o f cur vature o f 80 cm . Where do es
the ima ge form b y refraction and wha t is its
magnific ation? and
.
48.An object is lo cated in air 5 cm from the v ertex
of a c oncave sur face made o f glas s with a radius
of cur vature 20 cm . Where do es the ima ge form
by refraction and wha t is its ma gnific ation? U se
and .
49.Deriv e the spheric al inter face equa tion f or
refraction a t a c oncave sur face. (Hint : Follow the
deriv ation in the te xt for the c onvex sur face.)
2.4Thin L enses
50.How far from the lens mus t the film in a c amera
be, if the lens has a 35.0-mm f ocal length and is
being use d to photograph a flo wer 75.0 cm
away? Explicitly sho w ho w you f ollow the s teps
in the Figure 2.27 .
51.A certain slide projector has a 100 mm-f ocal
length lens . (a) Ho w far a way is the screen if a
slide is plac ed 103 mm from the lens and
produces a sharp ima ge? (b) If the slide is 24.0
by 36.0 mm , wha t are the dimensions o f the
ima ge? Explicitly sho w ho w you f ollow the s teps
in the Figure 2.27 .
52.A do ctor e xamines a mole with a 15.0- cm f ocal
length ma gnif ying glas s held 13.5 cm from the
mole . (a) Where is the ima ge? (b) Wha t is its
magnific ation? (c) Ho w big is the ima ge of a 5.00
mm diameter mole?
53.A camera with a 50.0-mm f ocal length lens is
being use d to photograph a p erson s tanding
3.00 m a way. (a) Ho w far from the lens mus t the
film b e? (b) If the film is 36.0 mm high , wha t
fraction o f a 1.75-m-tall p erson will fit on it? (c)Discus s ho w re asona ble this seems , based on
your e xperienc e in taking or p osing f or
photographs .
54.A camera lens use d for taking close -up
photographs has a f ocal length o f 22.0 mm . The
farthes t it c an b e plac ed from the film is 33.0
mm . (a) Wha t is the closes t object tha t can b e
photographe d? (b) Wha t is the ma gnific ation o f
this closes t object?
55.Supp ose y our 50.0 mm-f ocal length c amera
lens is 51.0 mm a way from the film in the
camera. (a) Ho w far a way is an object tha t is in
focus? ( b) Wha t is the height o f the object if its
ima ge is 2.00 cm high?
56.Wha t is the f ocal length o f a ma gnif ying glas s
that pro duces a ma gnific ation o f 3.00 when held
5.00 cm from an object , such as a rare c oin?
57.The ma gnific ation o f a b ook held 7.50 cm from
a 10.0 cm-f ocal length lens is 4.00. (a) F ind the
magnific ation f or the b ook when it is held 8.50
cm from the ma gnifier . (b) R epeat for the b ook
held 9.50 cm from the ma gnifier . (c) C omment
on ho w ma gnific ation chang es as the object
distanc e incre ases as in these tw o calcula tions .
58.Supp ose a 200 mm-f ocal length telephoto lens
is being use d to photograph mountains 10.0 km
away. (a) Where is the ima ge? (b) Wha t is the
height o f the ima ge of a 1000 m high cliff on one
of the mountains?
59.A camera with a 100 mm-f ocal length lens is
used to photograph the sun . Wha t is the height
of the ima ge of the sun on the film , giv en the
sun is in diameter and is
away?
60.Use the thin-lens e qua tion to sho w tha t the
magnific ation f or a thin lens is determine d by
its focal length and the object dis tanc e and is
given b y .
61.An object o f height 3.0 cm is plac ed 5.0 cm in
front o f a c onverging lens o f focal length 20 cm
and obser ved from the other side . Where and
how larg e is the ima ge?
62.An object o f height 3.0 cm is plac ed at 5.0 cm in
front o f a div erging lens o f focal length 20 cm
and obser ved from the other side . Where and
how larg e is the ima ge?
63.An object o f height 3.0 cm is plac ed at 25 cm in
front o f a div erging lens o f focal length 20 cm .
Behind the div erging lens , there is a c onverging
lens o f focal length 20 cm . The dis tanc e
between the lenses is 5.0 cm . Find the lo cation
and siz e of the final ima ge.
64.Two convex lenses o f focal lengths 20 cm and106 2 • Chap ter Re view
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

10 cm are plac ed 30 cm ap art, with the lens
with the long er focal length on the right . An
object o f height 2.0 cm is plac ed midw ay
between them and obser ved through e ach lens
from the left and from the right . Describ e wha t
you will see , such as where the ima ge(s) will
app ear, whether the y will b e upright or in verted
and their ma gnific ations .
2.5The Ey e
Unles s other wise s tated, the lens -to-retina dis tanc e
is 2.00 cm .
65.Wha t is the p ower o f the e ye when viewing an
object 50.0 cm a way?
66.Calcula te the p ower o f the e ye when viewing an
object 3.00 m a way.
67.The print in man y books a verages 3.50 mm in
height . Ho w high is the ima ge of the print on the
retina when the b ook is held 30.0 cm from the
eye?
68.Supp ose a c ertain p erson ’s visual acuity is such
that he c an see objects cle arly tha t form an
ima ge high on his retina. Wha t is the
maximum dis tanc e at which he c an re ad the
75.0- cm-high let ters on the side o f an airplane?
69.People who do v ery detaile d work close up , such
as jew elers , often c an see objects cle arly a t
much closer dis tanc e than the normal 25 cm .
(a) Wha t is the p ower o f the e yes o f a w oman
who c an see an object cle arly a t a dis tanc e of
only 8.00 cm? ( b) Wha t is the ima ge siz e of a
1.00-mm object , such as let tering inside a ring ,
held a t this dis tanc e? (c) Wha t would the siz e of
the ima ge be if the object w ere held a t the
normal 25.0 cm dis tanc e?
70.Wha t is the far p oint o f a p erson whose e yes
have a relax ed power o f 50.5 D ?
71.Wha t is the ne ar p oint o f a p erson whose e yes
have an ac commo dated power o f 53.5 D ?
72.(a) A laser reshaping the c orne a of a m yopic
patient re duces the p ower o f his e ye by 9.00 D ,
with a unc ertainty in the final c orrection .
Wha t is the rang e of diopters f or e yeglas s lenses
that this p erson might nee d after this
procedure? ( b) W as the p erson ne arsighte d or
farsighte d before the pro cedure? Ho w do y ou
kno w?
73.The p ower for normal close vision is 54.0 D . In a
vision-c orrection pro cedure , the p ower o f a
patient ’s eye is incre ased by 3.00 D . Assuming
that this pro duces normal close vision , wha t
was the p atient ’s ne ar p oint b efore theprocedure?
74.For normal dis tant vision , the e ye has a p ower
of 50.0 D . Wha t was the previous far p oint o f a
patient who had laser vision c orrection tha t
reduced the p ower o f her e ye by 7.00 D ,
producing normal dis tant vision?
75.The p ower for normal dis tant vision is 50.0 D . A
severely m yopic p atient has a far p oint o f 5.00
cm. By ho w man y diopters should the p ower o f
his e ye be re duced in laser vision c orrection to
obtain normal dis tant vision f or him?
76.A student ’s eyes, while re ading the blackb oard,
have a p ower o f 51.0 D . Ho w far is the b oard
from his e yes?
77.The p ower o f a ph ysician ’s eyes is 53.0 D while
examining a p atient . Ho w far from her e yes is
the object tha t is b eing e xamine d?
78.The normal p ower for dis tant vision is 50.0 D . A
young w oman with normal dis tant vision has a
10.0% a bility to ac commo date (tha t is, incre ase)
the p ower o f her e yes. Wha t is the closes t object
she c an see cle arly?
79.The far p oint o f a m yopic adminis trator is 50.0
cm. (a) Wha t is the relax ed power o f his e yes?
(b) If he has the normal 8.00% a bility to
accommo date, wha t is the closes t object he c an
see cle arly?
80.A very myopic man has a far p oint o f 20.0 cm .
Wha t power contact lens ( when on the e ye) will
correct his dis tant vision?
81.Repeat the previous problem f or e yeglas ses held
1.50 cm from the e yes.
82.A m yopic p erson sees tha t her c ontact lens
prescription is –4.00 D . Wha t is her far p oint?
83.Repeat the previous problem f or glas ses tha t are
1.75 cm from the e yes.
84.The c ontact lens prescription f or a mildly
farsighte d person is 0.750 D , and the p erson has
a ne ar p oint o f 29.0 cm . Wha t is the p ower o f the
tear la yer b etween the c orne a and the lens if the
correction is ide al, taking the te ar la yer into
account?
2.7The Simple Magnifier
85.If the ima ge forme d on the retina subtends an
angle o f and the object subtends an angle o f
, wha t is the ma gnific ation o f the ima ge?
86.Wha t is the ma gnific ation o f a ma gnif ying lens
with a f ocal length o f 10 cm if it is held 3.0 cm
from the e ye and the object is 12 cm from the
eye?
87.How far should y ou hold a 2.1 cm-f ocal length
magnif ying glas s from an object to obtain a2 • Chap ter Re view 107

magnific ation o f ? As sume y ou plac e your
eye 5.0 cm from the ma gnif ying glas s.
88.You hold a 5.0 cm-f ocal length ma gnif ying glas s
as close as p ossible to y our e ye. If y ou ha ve a
normal ne ar p oint , wha t is the ma gnific ation?
89.You view a mountain with a ma gnif ying glas s of
focal length . Wha t is the
magnific ation?
90.You view an object b y holding a 2.5 cm-f ocal
length ma gnif ying glas s 10 cm a way from it .
How far from y our e ye should y ou hold the
magnif ying glas s to obtain a ma gnific ation o f
91.A ma gnif ying glas s forms an ima ge 10 cm on
the opp osite side o f the lens from the object ,
which is 10 cm a way. Wha t is the ma gnific ation
of this lens f or a p erson with a normal ne ar
point if their e ye 12 cm from the object?
92.An object view ed with the nak ed eye subtends a
angle . If y ou view the object through a
magnif ying glas s, wha t angle is subtende d by
the ima ge forme d on y our retina?
93.For a normal , relax ed eye, a ma gnif ying glas s
produces an angular ma gnific ation o f 4.0. Wha t
is the larg est ma gnific ation p ossible with this
magnif ying glas s?
94.Wha t rang e of ma gnific ation is p ossible with a
7.0 cm-f ocal length c onverging lens?
95.A ma gnif ying glas s pro duces an angular
magnific ation o f 4.5 when use d by a y oung
person with a ne ar p oint o f 18 cm . Wha t is the
maximum angular ma gnific ation obtaine d by
an older p erson with a ne ar p oint o f 45 cm?
2.8Microscopes and T elescopes
96.A microsc ope with an o verall ma gnific ation o f
800 has an objectiv e tha t ma gnifies b y 200. (a)
Wha t is the angular ma gnific ation o f the
eyepiec e? (b) If there are tw o other objectiv es
that can b e use d, having ma gnific ations o f 100
and 400, wha t other total ma gnific ations are
possible?
97.(a) Wha t ma gnific ation is pro duced by a 0.150
cm-f ocal length microsc ope objectiv e tha t is
0.155 cm from the object b eing view ed? (b)
Wha t is the o verall ma gnific ation if an
eyepiec e (one tha t pro duces an angular
magnific ation o f 8.00) is use d?
98.Where do es an object nee d to b e plac ed rela tive
to a microsc ope for its 0.50 cm-f ocal length
objectiv e to pro duce a ma gnific ation o f −400?
99.An amo eba is 0.305 cm a way from the 0.300
cm-f ocal length objectiv e lens o f a microsc ope.(a) Where is the ima ge forme d by the objectiv e
lens? ( b) Wha t is this ima ge’s ma gnific ation? (c)
An e yepiec e with a 2.00- cm f ocal length is
plac ed 20.0 cm from the objectiv e. Where is the
final ima ge? (d) Wha t angular ma gnific ation is
produced by the e yepiec e? (e) Wha t is the
overall ma gnific ation? (See Figure 2.39 .)
100 .Unre asonable R esults Your friends sho w you
an ima ge through a microsc ope. The y tell y ou
that the microsc ope has an objectiv e with a
0.500- cm f ocal length and an e yepiec e with a
5.00- cm f ocal length . The resulting o verall
magnific ation is 250,000. Are these via ble
values f or a microsc ope?
Unles s other wise s tated, the lens -to-retina dis tanc e
is 2.00 cm .
101 .Wha t is the angular ma gnific ation o f a
telesc ope tha t has a 100 cm-f ocal length
objectiv e and a 2.50 cm-f ocal length e yepiec e?
102 .Find the dis tanc e between the objectiv e and
eyepiec e lenses in the telesc ope in the a bove
problem nee ded to pro duce a final ima ge very
far from the obser ver, where vision is mos t
relax ed. Note tha t a telesc ope is normally use d
to view v ery dis tant objects .
103 .A larg e reflecting telesc ope has an objectiv e
mirror with a 10.0-m radius o f cur vature .
Wha t angular ma gnific ation do es it pro duce
when a 3.00 m-f ocal length e yepiec e is use d?
104 .A small telesc ope has a c oncave mirror with a
2.00-m radius o f cur vature f or its objectiv e. Its
eyepiec e is a 4.00 cm-f ocal length lens . (a)
Wha t is the telesc ope’s angular ma gnific ation?
(b) Wha t angle is subtende d by a 25,000 km-
diameter sunsp ot? (c) Wha t is the angle o f its
telesc opic ima ge?
105 .A bino cular pro duces an angular
magnific ation o f −7.50, acting lik e a telesc ope.
(Mirrors are use d to mak e the ima ge upright .)
If the bino culars ha ve objectiv e lenses with a
75.0- cm f ocal length , wha t is the f ocal length
of the e yepiec e lenses?
106 .Cons truct Y our O wn P roblem Consider a
telesc ope of the typ e use d by Galileo , having a
convex objectiv e and a c oncave eyepiec e as
illus trated in p art (a) o fFigure 2.40 . Construct
a problem in which y ou c alcula te the lo cation
and siz e of the ima ge pro duced. Among the
things to b e considere d are the f ocal lengths o f
the lenses and their rela tive plac ements as
well as the siz e and lo cation o f the object .
Verify tha t the angular ma gnific ation is gre ater
than one . Tha t is, the angle subtende d at the108 2 • Chap ter Re view
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

eye by the ima ge is gre ater than the angle
subtende d by the object .
107 .Trace ra ys to find which w ay the giv en ra y will
emerg e after refraction through the thin lens
in the f ollowing figure . Assume thin-lens
appro xima tion . (Hin t: Pick a p oint Pon the
given ra y in e ach c ase. Treat tha t point as an
object . Now, find its ima geQ. Use the r ule: A ll
rays on the other side o f the lens will either g o
through Qor app ear to b e coming from Q.)
108 .Copy and dra w ra ys to find the final ima ge in
the f ollowing dia gram . (Hint : Find the
interme diate ima ge through lens alone . Use
the interme diate ima ge as the object f or the
mirror and w ork with the mirror alone to find
the final ima ge.)
109 .A concave mirror o f radius o f cur vature 10 cm
is plac ed 30 cm from a thin c onvex lens o f
focal length 15 cm . Find the lo cation and
magnific ation o f a small bulb sit ting 50 cm
from the lens b y using the alg ebraic metho d.
110 .An object o f height 3 cm is plac ed at 25 cm in
front o f a c onverging lens o f focal length 20
cm. Behind the lens there is a c oncave mirror
of focal length 20 cm . The dis tanc e between
the lens and the mirror is 5 cm . Find the
location , orienta tion and siz e of the final
ima ge.
111 .An object o f height 3 cm is plac ed at a dis tanc e
of 25 cm in front o f a c onverging lens o f focal
length 20 cm , to b e ref erre d to as the firs t lens .
Behind the lens there is another c onverging
lens o f focal length 20 cm plac ed 10 cm from
the firs t lens . There is a c oncave mirror o f focal
length 15 cm plac ed 50 cm from the sec ondlens . Find the lo cation , orienta tion , and siz e of
the final ima ge.
112 .An object o f height 2 cm is plac ed at 50 cm in
front o f a c onverging lens o f focal length 40
cm. Behind the lens , there is a c onvex mirror
of focal length 15 cm plac ed 30 cm from the
converging lens . Find the lo cation , orienta tion ,
and siz e of the final ima ge.
113 .Two concave mirrors are plac ed facing e ach other .
One o f them has a small hole in the middle . A p enn y
is plac ed on the b ottom mirror (see the f ollowing
figure). When y ou lo ok from the side , a re al ima ge of
the p enn y is obser ved above the hole . Explain ho w
that could happ en.
114 .A lamp o f height 5 cm is plac ed 40 cm in front
of a c onverging lens o f focal length 20 cm .
There is a plane mirror 15 cm b ehind the lens .
Where w ould y ou find the ima ge when y ou
look in the mirror?
115 .Parallel ra ys from a fara way sourc e strike a
converging lens o f focal length 20 cm a t an
angle o f 15 degrees with the horiz ontal
direction . Find the v ertical position o f the re al
ima ge obser ved on a screen in the f ocal plane .
116 .Parallel ra ys from a fara way sourc e strike a
diverging lens o f focal length 20 cm a t an angle
of 10 degrees with the horiz ontal direction . As
you lo ok through the lens , where in the v ertical
plane the ima ge would app ear?
117 .A light bulb is plac ed 10 cm from a plane
mirror , which fac es a c onvex mirror o f radius
of cur vature 8 cm . The plane mirror is lo cated
at a dis tanc e of 30 cm from the v ertex of the
convex mirror . Find the lo cation o f two ima ges
in the c onvex mirror . Are there other ima ges?
If so , where are the y located?
118 .A point sourc e of light is 50 cm in front o f a
converging lens o f focal length 30 cm . A
concave mirror with a f ocal length o f 20 cm is
plac ed 25 cm b ehind the lens . Where do es the
final ima ge form , and wha t are its orienta tion
and ma gnific ation?
119 .Copy and trac e to find ho w a horiz ontal ra y from S
comes out a fter the lens . Use for the
prism ma terial .2 • Chap ter Re view 109

120 .Copy and trac e ho w a horiz ontal ra y from S
comes out a fter the lens . Use for the
glas s.
121 .Copy and dra w ra ys to figure out the final
ima ge.
122 .By ra y tracing or b y calcula tion , find the plac einside the glas s where ra ys from Sconverge as
a result o f refraction through the lens and the
convex air -glas s inter face. Use a r uler to
estima te the radius o f cur vature .
123 .A div erging lens has a f ocal length o f 20 cm .
Wha t is the p ower o f the lens in diopters?
124 .Two lenses o f focal lengths o f and are
glue d tog ether with transp arent ma terial o f
negligible thicknes s. Sho w tha t the total p ower
of the tw o lenses simply add .
125 .Wha t will b e the angular ma gnific ation o f a
convex lens with the f ocal length 2.5 cm?
126 .Wha t will b e the f ormula f or the angular
magnific ation o f a c onvex lens o f focal length f
if the e ye is v ery close to the lens and the ne ar
point is lo cated a dis tanc eDfrom the e ye?
Additional P roblems
127 .Use a r uler and a protractor to dra w ra ys to
find ima ges in the f ollowing c ases .
(a) A p oint object lo cated on the axis o f a
concave mirror lo cated at a p oint within the
focal length from the v ertex.
(b) A p oint object lo cated on the axis o f a
concave mirror lo cated at a p oint far ther than
the f ocal length from the v ertex.
(c) A p oint object lo cated on the axis o f a
convex mirror lo cated at a p oint within the
focal length from the v ertex.
(d) A p oint object lo cated on the axis o f a
convex mirror lo cated at a p oint far ther than
the f ocal length from the v ertex.
(e) R epeat (a)–(d) f or a p oint object o ff the axis .
128 .Where should a 3 cm tall object b e plac ed in
front o f a c oncave mirror o f radius 20 cm so
that its ima ge is re al and 2 cm tall?
129 .A 3 cm tall object is plac ed 5 cm in front o f a
convex mirror o f radius o f cur vature 20 cm .
Where is the ima ge forme d? Ho w tall is the
ima ge? Wha t is the orienta tion o f the ima ge?
130 .You are lo oking f or a mirror so tha t you c an see
a four-fold ma gnifie d vir tual ima ge of an object
when the object is plac ed 5 cm from the v ertex
of the mirror . Wha t kind o f mirror y ou will
need? Wha t should b e the radius o f cur vature
of the mirror?131 .Deriv e the f ollowing e qua tion f or a c onvex
mirror:
,
where VOis the dis tanc e to the object Ofrom
vertexV,VIthe dis tanc e to the ima geIfrom V,
and VFis the dis tanc e to the f ocal point Ffrom
V. (Hint : use tw o sets o f similar triangles .)
132 .(a) Dra w ra ys to f orm the ima ge of a v ertical
object on the optic al axis and far ther than the
focal point from a c onverging lens . (b) U se
plane g eometr y in y our figure and pro ve tha t
the ma gnific ation mis giv en b y
133 .Use another ra y-tracing dia gram f or the same
situa tion as giv en in the previous problem to
deriv e the thin-lens e qua tion , .
134 .You photograph a 2.0-m-tall p erson with a
camera tha t has a 5.0 cm-f ocal length lens .
The ima ge on the film mus t be no more than
2.0 cm high . (a) Wha t is the closes t dis tanc e
the p erson c an s tand to the lens? ( b) F or this
distanc e, wha t should b e the dis tanc e from the
lens to the film?110 2 • Chap ter Re view
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

135 .Find the f ocal length o f a thin plano -convex
lens . The front sur face of this lens is fla t, and
the re ar sur face has a radius o f cur vature o f
. Assume tha t the inde x of
refraction o f the lens is 1.5.
136 .Find the f ocal length o f a meniscus lens with
and . Assume tha t the
inde x of refraction o f the lens is 1.5.
137 .A ne arsighte d man c annot see objects cle arly
beyond 20 cm from his e yes. Ho w close mus t
he s tand to a mirror in order to see wha t he is
doing when he sha ves?
138 .A mother sees tha t her child ’s contact lens
prescription is 0.750 D . Wha t is the child ’s
near p oint?
139 .Repeat the previous problem f or glas ses tha t
are 2.20 cm from the e yes.
140 .The c ontact -lens prescription f or a
nearsighte d person is −4.00 D and the p erson
has a far p oint o f 22.5 cm . Wha t is the p ower o f
the te ar la yer b etween the c orne a and the lens
if the c orrection is ide al, taking the te ar la yer
into ac count?
141 .Unre asonable R esults A boy has a ne ar p oint
of 50 cm and a far p oint o f 500 cm . Will a −4.00
D lens c orrect his far p oint to infinity?
142 .Find the angular ma gnific ation o f an ima ge by
a ma gnif ying glas s of if the object
is plac ed from the lens and the
lens is close to the e ye.
143 .Let objectiv e and e yepiec e of a c omp ound
microsc ope ha ve focal lengths o f 2.5 cm and
10 cm , resp ectiv ely and b e sep arated by 12
cm. A object is plac ed 6.0 cm from the
objectiv e. Ho w larg e is the vir tual ima ge
forme d by the objectiv e-eyepiec e system?
144 .Draw ra ys to sc ale to lo cate the ima ge at the
retina if the e ye lens has a f ocal length 2.5 cm
and the ne ar p oint is 24 cm . (Hint : Plac e an
object a t the ne ar p oint .)145 .The objectiv e and the e yepiec e of a microsc ope
have the f ocal lengths 3 cm and 10 cm
resp ectiv ely. Decide a bout the dis tanc e
between the objectiv e and the e yepiec e if w e
need a magnific ation from the objectiv e/
eyepiec e comp ound s ystem .
146 .A far -sighte d person has a ne ar p oint o f 100
cm. Ho w far in front or b ehind the retina do es
the ima ge of an object plac ed 25 cm from the
eye form? U se the c orne a to retina dis tanc e of
2.5 cm .
147 .A ne ar-sighte d person has a far p oint o f 80 cm .
(a) Wha t kind o f correctiv e lens will the p erson
need as suming the dis tanc e to the c ontact lens
from the e ye is z ero? ( b) Wha t would b e the
power o f the c ontact lens nee ded?
148 .In a reflecting telesc ope the objectiv e is a
concave mirror o f radius o f cur vature 2 m and
an e yepiec e is a c onvex lens o f focal length 5
cm. Find the app arent siz e of a 25-m tree a t a
distanc e of 10 km tha t you w ould p erceive
when lo oking through the telesc ope.
149 .Two stars tha t are apart are view ed by a
telesc ope and f ound to b e sep arated by an
angle o f . If the e yepiec e of the
telesc ope has a f ocal length o f 1.5 cm and the
objectiv e has a f ocal length o f 3 meters , how
far a way are the s tars from the obser ver?
150 .Wha t is the angular siz e of the Mo on if view ed
from a bino cular tha t has a f ocal length o f 1.2
cm f or the e yepiec e and a f ocal length o f 8 cm
for the objectiv e? U se the radius o f the mo on
and the dis tanc e of the mo on
from the obser ver to b e .
151 .An unkno wn planet a t a dis tanc e of
from Ear th is obser ved by a telesc ope tha t has
a focal length o f the e yepiec e of 1 cm and a
focal length o f the objectiv e of 1 m . If the far
away planet is seen to subtend an angle o f
at the e yepiec e, wha t is the siz e of
the planet?2 • Chap ter Re view 111

112 2 • Chap ter Re view
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

INTR ODUCTIONCHAP TER 3
Interference
3.1Young's Double -Slit Inter ference
3.2Mathematics o f Inter ference
3.3Multiple -Slit Inter ference
3.4Inter ference in Thin Films
3.5The Michelson Inter ferometer
The mos t certain indic ation o f a w ave is inter ferenc e. This w ave characteris tic is mos t
prominent when the w ave interacts with an object tha t is not larg e comp ared with the w avelength . Inter ferenc e
is obser ved for w ater w aves, sound w aves, light w aves, and , in fact , all typ es o f waves.
If you ha ve ev er lo oked at the re ds, blues , and greens in a sunlit so ap bubble and w ondere d ho w straw-colore d
soapy water c ould pro duce them , you ha ve hit up on one o f the man y phenomena tha t can only b e explaine d by
the w ave character o f light (see Figure 3.1 ). The same is tr ue for the c olors seen in an oil slick or in the light
reflecte d from a D VD disc . These and other interes ting phenomena c annot b e explaine d fully b y geometric
optics . In these c ases , light interacts with objects and e xhibits w ave characteris tics. The branch o f optics tha t
considers the b ehavior o f light when it e xhibits w ave characteris tics is c alledwave optics (sometimes c alled
physical optics). It is the topic o f this chapter .
3.1Young's Double -Slit Inter ference
Learning Objectiv es
By the end o f this section, y ou wil l be able t o:
•Explain the phenomenon o f inter ference
•Define cons tructive and des tructive inter ference f or a double slit
The Dutch ph ysicis t Chris tiaan Huy gens (1629–1695) thought tha t light w as a w ave, but Isaac N ewton did not .
Figur e3.1 Soap bubbles ar e blo wn fr om clear fluid int o very thin films . The c olors w e see ar e not due t o an y
pigmentation but ar e the r esul t of light int erference, which enhanc es specific w avelengths f or a giv en thicknes s of
the film.
Chap ter Outline

Newton thought tha t there w ere other e xplana tions f or c olor , and f or the inter ferenc e and diffraction eff ects
that were obser vable a t the time . Owing to N ewton ’s tremendous reputa tion , his view g enerally prev ailed; the
fact tha t Huy gens’ s principle w orked was not c onsidere d direct evidenc e pro ving tha t light is a w ave. The
acceptanc e of the w ave character o f light c ame man y years la ter in 1801, when the English ph ysicis t and
physician Thomas Young (1773–1829) demons trated optic al inter ferenc e with his no w-clas sic double -slit
experiment .
If there w ere not one but tw o sourc es o f waves, the w aves c ould b e made to inter fere, as in the c ase o f waves on
water ( Figure 3.2 ). If light is an electroma gnetic w ave, it mus t theref ore e xhibit inter ferenc e eff ects under
appropria te circums tanc es. In Y oung ’s experiment , sunlight w as p assed through a pinhole on a b oard. The
emerging b eam f ell on tw o pinholes on a sec ond b oard. The light emana ting from the tw o pinholes then f ell on
a screen where a p attern o f bright and dark sp ots w as obser ved. This p attern , called fring es, can only b e
explaine d through inter ferenc e, a w ave phenomenon .
Figur e3.2 Phot ograph o f an int erference pat tern pr oduc ed b y cir cular w ater w aves in a ripple tank. T wo thin plung ers ar e vibr ated up and
down in phase at the sur face of the w ater. Circular w ater w aves ar e produc ed b y and emanat e from each plung er.
We can analyz e double -slit inter ferenc e with the help o fFigure 3.3 , which depicts an app aratus analog ous to
Young ’s. Light from a mono chroma tic sourc e falls on a slit . The light emana ting from is incident on tw o
other slits and that are e quidis tant from . A p attern o finter ferenc e fring eson the screen is then
produced by the light emana ting from and . All slits are as sume d to b e so narro w tha t the y can b e
considere d sec ondar y point sourc es for Huy gens’ w avelets ( The N ature o f Light ). Slits and are a dis tanc e
dapart ( ), and the dis tanc e between the screen and the slits is , which is much gre ater than
d.114 3 • Inter ference
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Figur e3.3 The double -slit int erference experiment using monochr omatic light and narr ow slits . Fringes pr oduc ed b y int erfering Huy gens
wavelets fr om slits and are obser ved on the scr een.
Sinc e is as sume d to b e a p oint sourc e of mono chroma tic light , the sec ondar y Huy gens w avelets le aving
and always maintain a c onstant phase diff erenc e (zero in this c ase b ecause and are e quidis tant from
) and ha ve the same fre quency . The sourc es and are then said to b e coherent . Bycoherent w aves, we
mean the w aves are in phase or ha ve a definite phase rela tionship . The term incoherent means the w aves ha ve
random phase rela tionships , which w ould b e the c ase if and were illumina ted by tw o indep endent light
sourc es, rather than a single sourc e . Tw o indep endent light sourc es (which ma y be tw o sep arate are as
within the same lamp or the Sun) w ould g enerally not emit their light in unison , tha t is, not c oherently . Also,
because and are the same dis tanc e from , the amplitudes o f the tw o Huy gens w avelets are e qual .
Young use d sunlight , where e ach w avelength f orms its o wn p attern , making the eff ect more difficult to see . In
the f ollowing discus sion , we illus trate the double -slit e xperiment with mono chromat iclight (single ) to
clarif y the eff ect.Figure 3.4 shows the pure c onstructiv e and des tructiv e inter ferenc e of two waves ha ving the
same w avelength and amplitude .
Figur e3.4 The amplitudes o f waves add. (a) Pur e constructiv e int erference is ob tained when identical w aves ar e in phase . (b) Pur e
destructiv e int erference oc curs when identical w aves ar e exactl y out o f phase , or shift ed b y half a w avelength.
When light p asses through narro w slits , the slits act as sourc es o f coherent w aves and light spre ads out as3.1 • Y oung's Double -Slit Inter ference 115

semicircular w aves, as sho wn in Figure 3.5 (a). Pure constructiv e inter ferenc eoccurs where the w aves are cres t
to cres t or trough to trough . Pure destructiv e inter ferenc eoccurs where the y are cres t to trough . The light mus t
fall on a screen and b e sc attere d into our e yes for us to see the p attern . An analog ous p attern f or w ater w aves is
shown in Figure 3.2 . Note tha t regions o f constructiv e and des tructiv e inter ferenc e mo ve out from the slits a t
well-define d angles to the original b eam. These angles dep end on w avelength and the dis tanc e between the
slits , as w e shall see b elow.
Figur e3.5 Double slits pr oduc e tw o coher ent sour ces o f waves that int erfere. (a) Light spr eads out (diffr acts) fr om each slit, because the
slits ar e narr ow. These w aves o verlap and int erfere constructiv ely (bright lines) and des tructiv ely (dark r egions). W e can onl y see this if the
light fal ls ont o a scr een and is scat tered int o our e yes. (b) When light that has pas sed thr ough double slits fal ls on a scr een, w e see a
pattern such as this .
To unders tand the double -slit inter ferenc e pattern , consider ho w tw o waves tra vel from the slits to the screen
(Figure 3.6 ). Each slit is a diff erent dis tanc e from a giv en p oint on the screen . Thus , diff erent numb ers o f
wavelengths fit into e ach p ath. Waves start out from the slits in phase (cres t to cres t), but the y ma y end up out
of phase (cres t to trough) a t the screen if the p aths diff er in length b y half a w avelength , inter fering
destructiv ely. If the p aths diff er b y a whole w avelength , then the w aves arriv e in phase (cres t to cres t) at the
screen , inter fering c onstructiv ely. More g enerally , if the p ath length diff erenc e between the tw o waves is
any half -integral numb er o f wavelengths [(1 / 2) , (3 / 2) , (5 / 2) , etc .], then des tructiv e inter ferenc e occurs .
Similarly , if the p ath length diff erenc e is an y integral numb er o f wavelengths ( , 2, 3, etc .), then c onstructiv e
inter ferenc e occurs . These c onditions c an b e expres sed as e qua tions:
3.1
3.2116 3 • Inter ference
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Figur e3.6 Waves follow diff erent paths fr om the slits t o a c ommon point Pon a scr een. Des tructiv e int erference oc curs wher e one path is
a half w avelength long er than the other —the w aves start in phase but arriv e out o f phase . Cons tructiv e int erference oc curs wher e one path
is a whole w avelength long er than the other —the w aves start out and arriv e in phase .
3.2Mathematics o f Inter ference
Learning Objectiv es
By the end o f this section, y ou wil l be able t o:
•Determine the angles f or bright and dark fringes f or double slit inter ference
•Calculate the positions o f bright fringes on a scr een
Figure 3.7 (a) sho ws ho w to determine the p ath length diff erenc e for w aves tra veling from tw o slits to a
common p oint on a screen . If the screen is a larg e dis tanc e away comp ared with the dis tanc e between the slits ,
then the angle between the p ath and a line from the slits to the screen [p art (b)] is ne arly the same f or e ach
path. In other w ords , and are es sentially p arallel . The lengths o f and differ b y , as indic ated by the
two dashe d lines in the figure . Simple trig onometr y sho ws
where dis the dis tanc e between the slits . Combining this result with Equa tion 3.1 , we obtain c onstructiv e
inter ferenc e for a double slit when the p ath length diff erenc e is an integral multiple o f the w avelength , or
Similarly , to obtain des tructiv e inter ferenc e for a double slit , the p ath length diff erenc e mus t be a half -integral
multiple o f the w avelength , or
where is the w avelength o f the light ,dis the dis tanc e between slits , and is the angle from the original
direction o f the b eam as discus sed above. We callmthe order of the inter ferenc e. For e xample , is
fourth-order inter ferenc e.3.3
3.4
3.53.2 • Mathematics o f Inter ference 117

Figur e3.7 (a) T o reach P, the light w aves fr om and mus t travel diff erent dis tanc es. (b) The path diff erence betw een the tw o rays is
.
The e qua tions f or double -slit inter ferenc e imply tha t a series o f bright and dark lines are f orme d. For v ertical
slits , the light spre ads out horiz ontally on either side o f the incident b eam into a p attern c alled inter ferenc e
fring es(Figure 3.8 ). The closer the slits are , the more the bright fring es spre ad ap art. We can see this b y
examining the e qua tion
. For fix edand m, the smaller dis, the larg er mus t be, sinc e
. This is c onsis tent with our c ontention tha t wave eff ects are mos t notic eable when the object the
wave enc ounters ( here , slits a dis tanc edapart) is small . Small dgives larg e, henc e, a larg e eff ect.
Referring b ack to p art (a) o f the figure ,is typic ally small enough tha t , where is the
distanc e from the c entral maximum to the mth bright fring e and Dis the dis tanc e between the slit and the
screen .Equa tion 3.4 may then b e writ ten as
or
3.6118 3 • Inter ference
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Figur e3.8 The int erference pat tern f or a double slit has an int ensity that fal ls off with angle . The imag e sho ws mul tiple bright and dark
lines , or fring es, formed b y light pas sing thr ough a double slit.
EXAMPLE 3.1
Finding a W avelength fr om an Int erference Pattern
Supp ose y ou p ass light from a He -Ne laser through tw o slits sep arated by 0.0100 mm and find tha t the third
bright line on a screen is f orme d at an angle o f rela tive to the incident b eam. Wha t is the w avelength o f
the light?
Strategy
The phenomenon is tw o-slit inter ferenc e as illus trated in Figure 3.8 and the third bright line is due to third-
order c onstructiv e inter ferenc e, which me ans tha t . We are giv en and . The
wavelength c an thus b e found using the e qua tion for c onstructiv e inter ferenc e.
Solution
Solving for the w avelength gives
Subs tituting kno wn v alues yields
Significanc e
To three digits , this is the w avelength o f light emit ted by the c ommon He -Ne laser . Not b y coincidenc e, this re d
color is similar to tha t emit ted by neon lights . More imp ortant , however, is the fact tha t inter ferenc e patterns
can b e use d to me asure w avelength . Young did this f or visible w avelengths . This analytic al techinque is s till
widely use d to me asure electroma gnetic sp ectra. F or a giv en order , the angle f or c onstructiv e inter ferenc e
incre ases with , so tha t spectra (me asurements o f intensity v ersus w avelength) c an b e obtaine d.3.2 • Mathematics o f Inter ference 119

EXAMPLE 3.2
Calcula ting the Highes t Order P ossible
Inter ferenc e patterns do not ha ve an infinite numb er o f lines , sinc e there is a limit to ho w big mcan b e. Wha t is
the highes t-order c onstructiv e inter ferenc e possible with the s ystem describ ed in the prec eding e xample?
Strategy
The e qua tion (for ) describ es c onstructiv e inter ferenc e from tw o slits . For
fixed values o f , the larg ermis, the larg er is. Ho wever, the maximum v alue tha t can ha ve is 1,
for an angle o f . (Larg er angles imply tha t light g oes b ackw ard and do es not re ach the screen a t all .) Let us
find wha t value o fmcorresp onds to this maximum diffraction angle .
Solution
Solving the e qua tion formgives
Taking and subs tituting the v alues o f from the prec eding e xample giv es
Theref ore, the larg est integ ermcan b e is 15, or .
Significanc e
The numb er o f fring es dep ends on the w avelength and slit sep aration . The numb er o f fring es is v ery larg e for
larg e slit sep arations . Ho wever, rec all (see The P ropagation o f Light and the intro duction f or this chapter) tha t
wave inter ferenc e is only prominent when the w ave interacts with objects tha t are not larg e comp ared to the
wavelength . Theref ore, if the slit sep aration and the siz es o f the slits b ecome much gre ater than the
wavelength , the intensity p attern o f light on the screen chang es, so there are simply tw o bright lines c ast by the
slits , as e xpecte d, when light b ehaves lik e ra ys. We also note tha t the fring es g et fainter far ther a way from the
center . Conse quently , not all 15 fring es ma y be obser vable.
CHE CK Y OUR UNDER STANDING 3.1
In the s ystem use d in the prec eding e xamples , at wha t angles are the firs t and the sec ond bright fring es
forme d?
3.3Multiple -Slit Inter ference
Learning Objectiv es
By the end o f this section, y ou wil l be able t o:
•Describe the locations and intensities o f secondar y maxima f or multiple -slit inter ference
Analyzing the inter ferenc e of light p assing through tw o slits la ys out the theoretic al framew ork o f inter ferenc e
and giv es us a his toric al insight into Thomas Y oung ’s experiments . Ho wever, much o f the mo dern-da y
applic ation o f slit inter ferenc e uses not jus t two slits but man y, appro aching infinity f or practic al purp oses .
The k ey optic al element is c alled a diffraction gra ting , an imp ortant to ol in optic al analy sis, which w e discus s
in detail in Diffraction . Here , we start the analy sis o f multiple -slit inter ferenc e by taking the results from our
analy sis o f the double slit ( ) and e xtending it to c onfigura tions with three , four, and much larg er
numb ers o f slits .
Figure 3.9 shows the simples t case o f multiple -slit inter ferenc e, with three slits , or . The sp acing
between slits is d, and the p ath length diff erenc e between adjac ent slits is , same as the c ase f or the
double slit . Wha t is new is tha t the p ath length diff erenc e for the firs t and the third slits is . The120 3 • Inter ference
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

condition f or c onstructiv e inter ferenc e is the same as f or the double slit , tha t is
When this c ondition is met , is automa tically a multiple o f, so all three ra ys combine c onstructiv ely,
and the bright fring es tha t occur here are c alledprincip al maxima . But wha t happ ens when the p ath length
differenc e between adjac ent slits is only ? We can think o f the firs t and sec ond ra ys as inter fering
destructiv ely, but the third ra y remains unaltere d. Ins tead o f obtaining a dark fring e, or a minimum , as w e did
for the double slit , we see a secondar y maximum with intensity lo wer than the princip al maxima.
Figur e3.9 Interference with thr ee slits . Diff erent pairs o f emer ging r ays can c ombine c onstructiv ely or des tructiv ely at the same time ,
leading t o sec ondar y maxima .
In g eneral , forNslits , these sec ondar y maxima o ccur whenev er an unp aire d ra y is present tha t do es not g o
away due to des tructiv e inter ferenc e. This o ccurs a t evenly sp aced positions b etween the princip al
maxima. The amplitude o f the electroma gnetic w ave is c orresp ondingly diminishe d to of the w ave at the
princip al maxima, and the light intensity , being prop ortional to the square o f the w ave amplitude , is
diminishe d to of the intensity c omp ared to the princip al maxima. As Figure 3.10 shows, a dark fring e is
located between ev ery maximum (princip al or sec ondar y). As Ngrows larg er and the numb er o f bright and
dark fring es incre ase, the widths o f the maxima b ecome narro wer due to the closely lo cated neighb oring dark
fring es. Bec ause the total amount o f light energ y remains unaltere d, narro wer maxima re quire tha t each
maximum re aches a c orresp ondingly higher intensity .
Figur e3.10 Interference fring e pat terns f or tw o, thr ee and f our slits . As the number o f slits incr eases , mor e sec ondar y maxima appear ,3.3 • Multiple -Slit Inter ference 121

but the principal maxima bec ome bright er and narr ower. (a) Gr aph and (b) phot ographs o f fring e pat terns .
3.4Inter ference in Thin Films
Learning Objectiv es
By the end o f this section, y ou wil l be able t o:
•Describe the phase changes that occur upon r eflection
•Describe fringes es tablished b y reflected r ays of a common sour ce
•Explain the appear ance o f color s in thin films
The bright c olors seen in an oil slick flo ating on w ater or in a sunlit so ap bubble are c aused by inter ferenc e.
The brightes t colors are those tha t inter fere c onstructiv ely. This inter ferenc e is b etween light reflecte d from
different sur faces o f a thin film; thus , the eff ect is kno wn as thin-film inter ferenc e.
As w e note d before, inter ferenc e eff ects are mos t prominent when light interacts with something ha ving a siz e
similar to its w avelength . A thin film is one ha ving a thicknes stsmaller than a f ew times the w avelength o f
light ,. Sinc e color is as sociated indirectly with and b ecause all inter ferenc e dep ends in some w ay on the
ratio o fto the siz e of the object in volved, we should e xpect to see diff erent c olors f or diff erent thicknes ses o f a
film , as in Figure 3.11 .
Figur e3.11 These soap bubbles e xhibit bril liant c olors when e xposed t o sunlight. (cr edit: Sc ott Robinson)
Wha t causes thin-film inter ferenc e?Figure 3.12 shows ho w light reflecte d from the top and b ottom sur faces o f
a film c an inter fere. Incident light is only p artially reflecte d from the top sur face of the film (ra y 1). The
remainder enters the film and is itself p artially reflecte d from the b ottom sur face. Part of the light reflecte d
from the b ottom sur face can emerg e from the top o f the film (ra y 2) and inter fere with light reflecte d from the
top (ra y 1). The ra y tha t enters the film tra vels a gre ater dis tanc e, so it ma y be in or out o f phase with the ra y
reflecte d from the top . Ho wever, consider f or a moment , again, the bubbles in Figure 3.11 . The bubbles are
dark est where the y are thinnes t. Furthermore , if y ou obser ve a so ap bubble c arefully , you will note it g ets dark
at the p oint where it bre aks. For v ery thin films , the diff erenc e in p ath lengths o f rays 1 and 2 in Figure 3.12 is
negligible , so wh y should the y inter fere des tructiv ely and not c onstructiv ely? The ans wer is tha t a phase
chang e can o ccur up on reflection , as discus sed ne xt.122 3 • Inter ference
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Figur e3.12 Light s triking a thin film is par tially reflect ed (r ay 1) and par tially refracted at the t op sur face. The r efracted ray is par tially
reflect ed at the bot tom sur face and emer ges as r ay 2. These r ays int erfere in a w ay that depends on the thicknes s of the film and the
indic es o f refraction o f the v arious media .
Changes in Phase due to Re flection
We sa w earlier ( Waves) tha t reflection o f mechanic al w aves c an in volve a phase chang e. For e xample , a
traveling w ave on a s tring is in verted (i.e., a phase chang e) up on reflection a t a b oundar y to which a
heavier s tring is tie d. Ho wever, if the sec ond s tring is lighter (or more precisely , of a lo wer line ar density ), no
inversion o ccurs . Light w aves pro duce the same eff ect, but the deciding p arameter f or light is the inde x of
refraction . Light w aves underg o a or radians phase chang e up on reflection a t an inter face beyond which
is a me dium o f higher inde x of refraction . No phase chang e tak es plac e when reflecting from a me dium o f
lower refractiv e inde x (Figure 3.13 ). Bec ause o f the p erio dic na ture o f waves, this phase chang e or in version is
equiv alent to in dis tanc e tra velled, or p ath length . Both the p ath length and refractiv e indic es are
imp ortant factors in thin-film inter ferenc e.
Figur e3.13 Reflection at an int erface for light tr aveling fr om a medium with inde x of refraction to a medium with inde x of refraction
, , causes the phase o f the w ave to chang e byradians .
If the film in Figure 3.12 is a soap bubble (essentially w ater with air on b oth sides), then a phase shift o f
occurs f or ra y 1 but not f or ra y 2. Thus , when the film is v ery thin and the p ath length diff erenc e between the
two ra ys is negligible , the y are e xactly out o f phase , and des tructiv e inter ferenc e occurs a t all w avelengths .
Thus , the so ap bubble is dark here . The thicknes s of the film rela tive to the w avelength o f light is the other3.4 • Inter ference in Thin Films 123

crucial factor in thin-film inter ferenc e. Ray 2 in Figure 3.12 travels a gre ater dis tanc e than ra y 1. F or light
incident p erpendicular to the sur face, ray 2 tra vels a dis tanc e appro xima tely 2 tfarther than ra y 1. When this
distanc e is an integral or half -integral multiple o f the w avelength in the me dium , where is the
wavelength in v acuum and nis the inde x of refraction), c onstructiv e or des tructiv e inter ferenc e occurs ,
dep ending also on whether there is a phase chang e in either ra y.
EXAMPLE 3.3
Calcula ting the Thicknes s of a Nonr eflectiv e Lens Coa ting
Sophis ticated cameras use a series o f sev eral lenses . Light c an reflect from the sur faces o f these v arious lenses
and degrade ima ge clarity . To limit these reflections , lenses are c oated with a thin la yer o f ma gnesium fluoride ,
which c auses des tructiv e thin-film inter ferenc e. Wha t is the thinnes t this film c an b e, if its inde x of refraction
is 1.38 and it is designe d to limit the reflection o f 550-nm light , normally the mos t intense visible w avelength?
Assume the inde x of refraction o f the glas s is 1.52.
Strategy
Refer to Figure 3.12 and use for air , , and . Both ra y 1 and ra y 2 ha ve a shift
upon reflection . Thus , to obtain des tructiv e inter ferenc e, ray 2 nee ds to tra vel a half w avelength far ther than
ray 1. F or ra ys incident p erpendicularly , the p ath length diff erenc e is 2 t.
Solution
To obtain des tructiv e inter ferenc e here ,
where is the w avelength in the film and is giv en b y . Thus ,
Solving f ortand entering kno wn v alues yields
Significanc e
Films such as the one in this e xample are mos t eff ectiv e in pro ducing des tructiv e inter ferenc e when the
thinnes t layer is use d, sinc e light o ver a bro ader rang e of incident angles is re duced in intensity . These films
are c allednonreflectiv e coatings ; this is only an appro xima tely c orrect description , though , sinc e other
wavelengths are only p artially c ancelled. Nonreflectiv e coatings are also use d in c ar windo ws and sunglas ses.
Combining P ath L ength Dif ference with Phase Change
Thin-film inter ferenc e is mos t constructiv e or mos t des tructiv e when the p ath length diff erenc e for the tw o
rays is an integral or half -integral w avelength . Tha t is, for ra ys incident p erpendicularly ,
To kno w whether inter ferenc e is c onstructiv e or des tructiv e, you mus t also determine if there is a phase
chang e up on reflection . Thin-film inter ferenc e thus dep ends on film thicknes s, the w avelength o f light , and the
refractiv e indic es. For white light incident on a film tha t varies in thicknes s, you c an obser ve rainb ow colors o f
constructiv e inter ferenc e for v arious w avelengths as the thicknes s varies .124 3 • Inter ference
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

EXAMPLE 3.4
Soap Bubbles
(a) Wha t are the three smalles t thicknes ses o f a so ap bubble tha t pro duce constructiv e inter ferenc e for re d
light with a w avelength o f 650 nm? The inde x of refraction o f soap is tak en to b e the same as tha t of water. (b)
Wha t three smalles t thicknes ses giv e des tructiv e inter ferenc e?
Strategy
UseFigure 3.12 to visualiz e the bubble , which acts as a thin film b etween tw o layers o f air . Thus
for air , and for so ap (e quiv alent to w ater). There is a shift f or ra y 1 reflecte d from the top sur face
of the bubble and no shift f or ra y 2 reflecte d from the b ottom sur face. To get constructiv e inter ferenc e, then ,
the p ath length diff erenc e (2t) mus t be a half -integral multiple o f the w avelength—the firs t three b eing
, and . To get des tructiv e inter ferenc e, the p ath length diff erenc e mus t be an integral multiple
of the w avelength—the firs t three b eing 0, , and .
Solution
a. Constructiv e inter ferenc e occurs here when
Thus , the smalles t constructiv e thicknes s is
The ne xt thicknes s tha t giv es c onstructiv e inter ferenc e is , so tha t
Finally , the third thicknes s pro ducing c onstructiv e inter ferenc e is , so tha t
b. For des tructiv e inter ferenc e, the p ath length diff erenc e here is an integral multiple o f the w avelength . The
first occurs f or zero thicknes s, sinc e there is a phase chang e at the top sur face, tha t is,
the v ery thin (or negligibly thin) c ase discus sed above. The firs t non-z ero thicknes s pro ducing des tructiv e
inter ferenc e is
Subs tituting kno wn v alues giv es
Finally , the third des tructiv e thicknes s is , so tha t
Significanc e
If the bubble w ere illumina ted with pure re d light , we would see bright and dark b ands a t very unif orm
incre ases in thicknes s. First would b e a dark b and a t 0 thicknes s, then bright a t 122 nm thicknes s, then dark a t
244 nm , bright a t 366 nm , dark a t 488 nm , and bright a t 610 nm . If the bubble v arie d smo othly in thicknes s,
like a smo oth w edge, then the b ands w ould b e ev enly sp aced.
CHE CK Y OUR UNDER STANDING 3.23.4 • Inter ference in Thin Films 125

Going fur ther with Example 3.4 , wha t are the ne xt tw o thicknes ses o f soap bubble tha t would le ad to (a)
constructiv e inter ferenc e, and ( b) des tructiv e inter ferenc e?
Another e xample o f thin-film inter ferenc e can b e seen when microsc ope slides are sep arated (see Figure 3.14 ).
The slides are v ery fla t, so tha t the w edge of air b etween them incre ases in thicknes s very unif ormly . A phase
chang e occurs a t the sec ond sur face but not the firs t, so a dark b and f orms where the slides touch . The
rainb ow colors o f constructiv e inter ferenc e rep eat, going from violet to re d again and a gain as the dis tanc e
between the slides incre ases . As the la yer o f air incre ases , the b ands b ecome more difficult to see , because
slight chang es in incident angle ha ve gre ater eff ects on p ath length diff erenc es. If mono chroma tic light ins tead
of white light is use d, then bright and dark b ands are obtaine d ra ther than rep eating rainb ow colors .
Figur e3.14 (a) The r ainbo w-color bands ar e produc ed b y thin-film int erference in the air betw een the tw o glas s slides . (b) Schematic o f
the paths tak en b y rays in the w edge of air betw een the slides . (c) If the air w edge is il luminat ed with monochr omatic light, bright and dark
bands ar e ob tained r ather than r epeating r ainbo w colors .
An imp ortant applic ation o f thin-film inter ferenc e is f ound in the manufacturing o f optic al ins truments . A lens
or mirror c an b e comp ared with a mas ter as it is b eing ground , allo wing it to b e shap ed to an ac curacy o f les s
than a w avelength o ver its entire sur face.Figure 3.15 illus trates the phenomenon c alledNewton ’s rings ,
which o ccurs when the plane sur faces o f two lenses are plac ed tog ether . (The circular b ands are c alled
Newton ’s rings b ecause Isaac N ewton describ ed them and their use in detail . Newton did not disc over them;
Robert Ho oke did , and N ewton did not b eliev e the y were due to the w ave character o f light .) Each suc cessive
ring o f a giv en c olor indic ates an incre ase o f only half a w avelength in the dis tanc e between the lens and the
blank , so tha t gre at precision c an b e obtaine d. Onc e the lens is p erfect, no rings app ear.126 3 • Inter ference
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Figur e3.15 “Newton’s rings” int erference fring es ar e produc ed when tw o plano -convex lenses ar e plac ed together with their plane
surfaces in c ontact. The rings ar e created b y int erference betw een the light r eflect ed o ff the tw o sur faces as a r esul t of a slight g ap betw een
them, indicating that these sur faces ar e not pr ecisel y plane but ar e slightl y convex. (cr edit: Ulf Seif ert)
Thin-film inter ferenc e has man y other applic ations , both in na ture and in manufacturing . The wings o f certain
moths and but terflies ha ve ne arly iridesc ent c olors due to thin-film inter ferenc e. In addition to pigmenta tion ,
the wing ’s color is a ffecte d gre atly b y constructiv e inter ferenc e of certain w avelengths reflecte d from its film-
coated sur face. Some c ar manufacturers o ffer sp ecial p aint jobs tha t use thin-film inter ferenc e to pro duce
colors tha t chang e with angle . This e xpensiv e option is b ased on v aria tion o f thin-film p ath length diff erenc es
with angle . Security f eatures on cre dit c ards , banknotes , driving lic enses , and similar items prone to f orgery
use thin-film inter ferenc e, diffraction gra tings , or holograms . As e arly as 1998, A ustralia le d the w ay with
dollar bills printe d on p olymer with a diffraction gra ting security f eature , making the currency difficult to
forge. Other c ountries , such as C anada, N ew Z ealand , and T aiwan, are using similar technologies , while US
currency includes a thin-film inter ferenc e eff ect.
3.5The Michelson Inter ferometer
Learning Objectiv es
By the end o f this section, y ou wil l be able t o:
•Explain changes in fringes obser ved with a Michelson inter ferome ter caused b y mirr or mo vements
•Explain changes in fringes obser ved with a Michelson inter ferome ter caused b y changes in medium
The Michelson inter ferometer (invente d by the Americ an ph ysicis t Albert A.Michelson , 1852–1931) is a
precision ins trument tha t pro duces inter ferenc e fring es b y split ting a light b eam into tw o parts and then
recombining them a fter the y ha ve tra veled diff erent optic al paths.Figure 3.16 depicts the inter ferometer and
the p ath o f a light b eam from a single p oint on the e xtende d sourc e S, which is a ground-glas s pla te tha t
diffuses the light from a mono chroma tic lamp o f wavelength . The b eam s trikes the half -silv ered mirror M,
where half o f it is reflecte d to the side and half p asses through the mirror . The reflecte d light tra vels to the
movable plane mirror , where it is reflecte d back through M to the obser ver. The transmit ted half o f the
original b eam is reflecte d back b y the s tationar y mirror and then to ward the obser ver b y M.3.5 • The Michelson Inter ferometer 127

Figur e3.16 (a) The Michelson int erferomet er. The e xtended light sour ce is a gr ound-glas s plat e that diffuses the light fr om a laser . (b) A
planar vie w of the int erferomet er.
Because b oth b eams origina te from the same p oint on the sourc e, the y are c oherent and theref ore inter fere.
Notice from the figure tha t one b eam p asses through M three times and the other only onc e. To ensure tha t
both b eams tra verse the same thicknes s of glas s, a c omp ensa tor pla te C o f transp arent glas s is plac ed in the
arm c ontaining . This pla te is a duplic ate of M ( without the silv ering ) and is usually cut from the same piec e
of glas s use d to pro duce M. W ith the c omp ensa tor in plac e, any phase diff erenc e between the tw o beams is due
solely to the diff erenc e in the dis tanc es the y tra vel.
The p ath diff erenc e of the tw o beams when the y rec ombine is , where is the dis tanc e between M
and , and is the dis tanc e between M and . Supp ose this p ath diff erenc e is an integ er numb er o f
wavelengths . Then , constructiv e inter ferenc e occurs and a bright ima ge of the p oint on the sourc e is seen
at the obser ver. Now the light from an y other p oint on the sourc e whose tw o beams ha ve this same p ath
differenc e also underg oes c onstructiv e inter ferenc e and pro duces a bright ima ge. The c ollection o f these p oint
ima ges is a bright fring e corresp onding to a p ath diff erenc e of (Figure 3.17 ). When is mo ved a
distanc e , this p ath diff erenc e chang es b y , and e ach fring e mo ves to the p osition previously
occupie d by an adjac ent fring e. Conse quently , by counting the numb er o f fring esmpassing a giv en p oint as
is mo ved, an obser ver can me asure minute displac ements tha t are ac cura te to a fraction o f a w avelength ,
as sho wn b y the rela tion
Figur e3.17 Fringes pr oduc ed with a Michelson int erferomet er. (credit: “ SILL AGESvideos”/ YouTube)3.7128 3 • Inter ference
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

EXAMPLE 3.5
Precise Dis tanc e Measur ements b y Michelson Int erferomet er
A re d laser light o f wavelength 630 nm is use d in a Michelson inter ferometer . While k eeping the mirror
fixed, mirror is mo ved. The fring es are f ound to mo ve past a fix ed cros s-hair in the view er. Find the
distanc e the mirror is mo ved for a single fring e to mo ve past the ref erenc e line .
Strategy
Refer to Figure 3.16 for the g eometr y. We use the result o f the Michelson inter ferometer inter ferenc e condition
to find the dis tanc e mo ved, .
Solution
For a 630-nm re d laser light , and f or e ach fring e cros sing , the dis tanc e tra veled by if you k eep
fixed is
Significanc e
An imp ortant applic ation o f this me asurement is the definition o f the s tandard meter . As mentione d in Units
and Me asurement , the length o f the s tandard meter w as onc e define d as the mirror displac ement in a
Michelson inter ferometer c orresp onding to 1,650,763.73 w avelengths o f the p articular fring e of krypton-86 in
a gas discharg e tub e.
EXAMPLE 3.6
Measuring the R efractiv e Inde x of a Gas
In one arm o f a Michelson inter ferometer , a glas s chamb er is plac ed with a ttachments f or ev acua ting the inside
and put ting g ases in it . The sp ace inside the c ontainer is 2 cm wide . Initially , the c ontainer is empty . As g as is
slowly let into the chamb er, you obser ve tha t dark fring es mo ve past a ref erenc e line in the field o f obser vation .
By the time the chamb er is fille d to the desire d pres sure , you ha ve counte d 122 fring es mo ve past the
referenc e line . The w avelength o f the light use d is 632.8 nm . Wha t is the refractiv e inde x of this g as?
Strategy
The fring es obser ved comp ose the diff erenc e between the numb er o f wavelengths tha t fit within the
empty chamb er (vacuum) and the numb er o f wavelengths tha t fit within the same chamb er when it is g as-
fille d. The w avelength in the fille d chamb er is shor ter b y a factor o fn, the inde x of refraction .3.5 • The Michelson Inter ferometer 129

Solution
The ra y tra vels a dis tanc e to the right through the glas s chamb er and another dis tanc etto the left
upon reflection . The total tra vel is . When empty , the numb er o f wavelengths tha t fit in this chamb er is
where is the w avelength in v acuum o f the light use d. In an y other me dium , the w avelength is
and the numb er o f wavelengths tha t fit in the g as-fille d chamb er is
The numb er o f fring es obser ved in the transition is
Solving f or gives
and .
Significanc e
The indic es o f refraction f or g ases are so close to tha t of vacuum , tha t we normally c onsider them e qual to 1.
The diff erenc e between 1 and 1.0019 is so small tha t me asuring it re quires a c orresp ondingly sensitiv e
technique such as inter ferometr y. We cannot , for e xample , hop e to me asure this v alue using techniques b ased
simply on Snell ’s law.
CHE CK Y OUR UNDER STANDING 3.3
Although m, the numb er o f fring es obser ved, is an integ er, which is o ften reg arde d as ha ving z ero unc ertainty ,
in practic al terms , it is all to o easy to lose track when c ounting fring es. InExample 3.6 , if y ou es tima te tha t you
might ha ve mis sed as man y as fiv e fring es when y ou rep orted fring es, (a) is the v alue f or the inde x of
refraction w orked out in Example 3.6 too larg e or to o small? ( b) B y ho w much?
PROBLEM-SOL VING S TRATEGY
Wave Op tics
Step 1. Examine the situa tion to determine tha t inter ferenc e is in volved. Identif y whether slits , thin films , or
inter ferometers are c onsidere d in the problem .
Step 2. If slits are in volved, note tha t diffraction gra tings and double slits pro duce very similar inter ferenc e
patterns , but tha t gra tings ha ve narro wer (sharp er) maxima. Single -slit p atterns are characteriz ed by a larg e
central maximum and smaller maxima to the sides .
Step 3. If thin-film inter ferenc e or an inter ferometer is in volved, tak e note o f the p ath length diff erenc e
between the tw o ra ys tha t inter fere. Be c ertain to use the w avelength in the me dium in volved, sinc e it diff ers
from the w avelength in v acuum . Note also tha t there is an additional phase shift when light reflects from a
medium with a gre ater inde x of refraction .
Step 4. Identif y exactly wha t nee ds to b e determine d in the problem (identif y the unkno wns) . A writ ten lis t is130 3 • Inter ference
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

useful . Dra w a dia gram o f the situa tion . Labeling the dia gram is useful .
Step 5. Mak e a lis t of wha t is giv en or c an b e inf erre d from the problem as s tated (identif y the kno wns) .
Step 6. Solv e the appropria te equa tion f or the quantity to b e determine d (the unkno wn) and enter the kno wns .
Slits , gra tings , and the Ra yleigh limit in volve equa tions .
Step 7. For thin-film inter ferenc e, you ha ve constructiv e inter ferenc e for a total shift tha t is an integral numb er
of wavelengths . You ha ve des tructiv e inter ferenc e for a total shift o f a half -integral numb er o f wavelengths .
Always keep in mind tha t cres t to cres t is c onstructiv e where as cres t to trough is des tructiv e.
Step 8. Check to see if the ans wer is re asona ble: Do es it mak e sense? Angles in inter ferenc e patterns c annot b e
greater than , for e xample .3.5 • The Michelson Inter ferometer 131

CHAP TER RE VIEW
Key Terms
coherent w aves waves are in phase or ha ve a
definite phase rela tionship
fring es bright and dark p atterns o f inter ferenc e
incoherent waves ha ve random phase
rela tionships
inter ferometer instrument tha t uses inter ferenc e
of waves to mak e me asurements
mono chromat ic light c omp osed of one w avelength
only
Newton ’s rings circular inter ferenc e pattern
created by inter ferenc e between the lightreflecte d off tw o sur faces as a result o f a slight
gap b etween them
order integ ermused in the e qua tions f or
constructiv e and des tructiv e inter ferenc e for a
double slit
princip al maximum brightes t inter ferenc e fring es
seen with multiple slits
secondar y maximum bright inter ferenc e fring es
of intensity lo wer than the princip al maxima
thin-film inter ferenc einter ferenc e between light
reflecte d from diff erent sur faces o f a thin film
Key Equations
Constructiv e inter ferenc e form= 0, ±1, ±2, ±3…
Destructiv e inter ferenc e form= 0, ±1, ±2, ±3…
Path length diff erenc e for w aves from tw o slits to a
common p oint on a screen
Constructiv e inter ferenc e
Destructiv e inter ferenc e
Distanc e from c entral maximum to the mth bright fring e
Displac ement me asure d by a Michelson inter ferometer
Summar y
3.1Young's Double -Slit Inter ference
•Young ’s double -slit e xperiment g ave definitiv e
proof of the w ave character o f light .
•An inter ferenc e pattern is obtaine d by the
superposition o f light from tw o slits .
3.2Mathematics o f Inter ference
•In double -slit diffraction , constructiv e
inter ferenc e occurs when
, where d
is the dis tanc e between the slits ,is the angle
rela tive to the incident direction , and mis the
order o f the inter ferenc e.
•Destructiv e inter ferenc e occurs when
.3.3Multiple -Slit Inter ference
•Inter ferenc e from multiple slits ( )
produces princip al as w ell as sec ondar y
maxima.
•As the numb er o f slits is incre ased, the intensity
of the princip al maxima incre ases and the width
decre ases .
3.4Inter ference in Thin Films
•When light reflects from a me dium ha ving an
inde x of refraction gre ater than tha t of the
medium in which it is tra veling , a phase
chang e (or a shift) o ccurs .
•Thin-film inter ferenc e occurs b etween the light
reflecte d from the top and b ottom sur faces o f a
film . In addition to the p ath length diff erenc e,132 3 • Chap ter Re view
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

there c an b e a phase chang e.
3.5The Michelson Inter ferometer
•When the mirror in one arm o f theinter ferometer mo ves a dis tanc e of each
fring e in the inter ferenc e pattern mo ves to the
position previously o ccupie d by the adjac ent
fring e.
Concep tual Ques tions
3.1Young's Double -Slit Inter ference
1.Young ’s double -slit e xperiment bre aks a single
light b eam into tw o sourc es. Would the same
pattern b e obtaine d for tw o indep endent sourc es
of light , such as the he adlights o f a dis tant c ar?
Explain .
2.Is it p ossible to cre ate a e xperimental setup in
which there is only des tructiv e inter ferenc e?
Explain .
3.Why won’t two small so dium lamps , held close
together , pro duce an inter ferenc e pattern on a
distant screen? Wha t if the so dium lamps w ere
replac ed by tw o laser p ointers held close
together?
3.2Mathematics o f Inter ference
4.Supp ose y ou use the same double slit to p erform
Young ’s double -slit e xperiment in air and then
repeat the e xperiment in w ater. Do the angles to
the same p arts of the inter ferenc e pattern g et
larg er or smaller? Do es the c olor o f the light
chang e? Explain .
5.Why is mono chroma tic light use d in the double
slit e xperiment? Wha t would happ en if white
light w ere use d?
3.4Inter ference in Thin Films
6.Wha t eff ect do es incre asing the w edge angle ha ve
on the sp acing o f inter ferenc e fring es? If the
wedge angle is to o larg e, fring es are not
obser ved. Wh y?
7.How is the diff erenc e in p aths tak en b y tw o
originally in-phase light w aves rela ted to whether
they inter fere c onstructiv ely or des tructiv ely?
How can this b e affecte d by reflection? B y
refraction?
8.Is there a phase chang e in the light reflecte d from
either sur face of a c ontact lens flo ating on aperson ’s tear la yer? The inde x of refraction o f the
lens is a bout 1.5, and its top sur face is dr y.
9.In placing a sample on a microsc ope slide , a glas s
cover is plac ed over a w ater drop on the glas s
slide . Light incident from a bove can reflect from
the top and b ottom o f the glas s cover and from
the glas s slide b elow the w ater drop . At which
surfaces will there b e a phase chang e in the
reflecte d light?
10.Ans wer the a bove ques tion if the fluid b etween
the tw o piec es o f cro wn glas s is c arbon
disulfide .
11.While c ontempla ting the f ood value o f a slic e of
ham , you notic e a rainb ow of color reflecte d
from its mois t sur face. Explain its origin .
12.An in ventor notic es tha t a so ap bubble is dark a t
its thinnes t and re alizes tha t des tructiv e
inter ferenc e is taking plac e for all w avelengths .
How could she use this kno wledge to mak e a
nonreflectiv e coating f or lenses tha t is eff ectiv e
at all w avelengths? Tha t is, wha t limits w ould
there b e on the inde x of refraction and
thicknes s of the c oating? Ho w might this b e
impractic al?
13.A nonreflectiv e coating lik e the one describ ed in
Example 3.3 works ide ally f or a single
wavelength and f or p erpendicular incidenc e.
Wha t happ ens f or other w avelengths and other
incident directions? Be sp ecific .
14.Why is it much more difficult to see inter ferenc e
fring es for light reflecte d from a thick piec e of
glas s than from a thin film? W ould it b e easier if
mono chroma tic light w ere use d?
3.5The Michelson Inter ferometer
15.Describ e ho w a Michelson inter ferometer c an
be use d to me asure the inde x of refraction o f a
gas (including air).
Problems
3.2Mathematics o f Inter ference
16.At wha t angle is the firs t-order maximum f or
450-nm w avelength blue light falling on double
slits sep arated by 0.0500 mm?17.Calcula te the angle f or the third-order
maximum o f 580-nm w avelength y ellow light
falling on double slits sep arated by 0.100 mm .
18.Wha t is the sep aration b etween tw o slits f or3 • Chap ter Re view 133

which 610-nm orang e light has its firs t
maximum a t an angle o f ?
19.Find the dis tanc e between tw o slits tha t
produces the firs t minimum f or 410-nm violet
light a t an angle o f
20.Calcula te the w avelength o f light tha t has its
third minimum a t an angle o f when falling
on double slits sep arated by . Explicitly
show ho w you f ollow the s teps from the
Problem-Solving Stra tegy: W ave Optics , located
at the end o f the chapter .
21.Wha t is the w avelength o f light falling on double
slits sep arated by if the third-order
maximum is a t an angle o f ?
22.At wha t angle is the sec ond-order maximum f or
the situa tion in the prec eding problem?
23.Wha t is the highes t-order maximum f or 400-nm
light falling on double slits sep arated by
?
24.Find the larg est wavelength o f light falling on
double slits sep arated by for which
there is a firs t-order maximum . Is this in the
visible p art of the sp ectr um?
25.Wha t is the smalles t sep aration b etween tw o
slits tha t will pro duce a sec ond-order maximum
for 720-nm re d light?
26.(a) Wha t is the smalles t sep aration b etween tw o
slits tha t will pro duce a sec ond-order maximum
for an y visible light? ( b) F or all visible light?
27.(a) If the firs t-order maximum f or
mono chroma tic light falling on a double slit is a t
an angle o f , at wha t angle is the sec ond-
order maximum? ( b) Wha t is the angle o f the
first minimum? (c) Wha t is the highes t-order
maximum p ossible here?
28.Sho wn b elow is a double slit lo cated a dis tanc ex
from a screen , with the dis tanc e from the c enter o f
the screen giv en b yy. When the dis tanc ed
between the slits is rela tively larg e, numerous
bright sp ots app ear, called fring es. Sho w tha t, for
small angles ( where , with in radians),
the dis tanc e between fring es is giv en b y
29.Using the result o f the prec eding problem , (a)
calcula te the dis tanc e between fring es for
633-nm light falling on double slits sep arated
by 0.0800 mm , located 3.00 m from a screen .
(b) Wha t would b e the dis tanc e between fring es
if the entire app aratus w ere submerse d in
water, whose inde x of refraction is 1.33?
30.Using the result o f the problem tw o problems
prior , find the w avelength o f light tha t pro duces
fring es 7.50 mm ap art on a screen 2.00 m from
double slits sep arated by 0.120 mm .
31.In a double -slit e xperiment , the fifth maximum
is 2.8 cm from the c entral maximum on a
screen tha t is 1.5 m a way from the slits . If the
slits are 0.15 mm ap art, wha t is the w avelength
of the light b eing use d?
32.The sourc e in Y oung ’s experiment emits a t two
wavelengths . On the viewing screen , the f ourth
maximum f or one w avelength is lo cated at the
same sp ot as the fifth maximum f or the other
wavelength . Wha t is the ra tio o f the tw o
wavelengths?
33.If 500-nm and 650-nm light illumina tes tw o
slits tha t are sep arated by 0.50 mm , how far
apart are the sec ond-order maxima f or these
two wavelengths on a screen 2.0 m a way?
34.Red light o f wavelength o f 700 nm falls on a
double slit sep arated by 400 nm . (a) A t wha t
angle is the firs t-order maximum in the
diffraction p attern? ( b) Wha t is unre asona ble
about this result? (c) Which as sumptions are
unre asona ble or inc onsis tent?
3.3Multiple -Slit Inter ference
35.Ten narro w slits are e qually sp aced 0.25 mm
apart and illumina ted with y ellow light o f
wavelength 580 nm . (a) Wha t are the angular
positions o f the third and f ourth princip al
maxima? ( b) Wha t is the sep aration o f these
maxima on a screen 2.0 m from the slits?134 3 • Chap ter Re view
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

36.The width o f bright fring es c an b e calcula ted as
the sep aration b etween the tw o adjac ent dark
fring es on either side . Find the angular widths
of the third- and f ourth-order bright fring es
from the prec eding problem .
37.For a three -slit inter ferenc e pattern , find the
ratio o f the p eak intensities o f a sec ondar y
maximum to a princip al maximum .
38.Wha t is the angular width o f the c entral fring e of
the inter ferenc e pattern o f (a) 20 slits sep arated
by ? (b) 50 slits with the
same sep aration? As sume tha t .
3.4Inter ference in Thin Films
39.A so ap bubble is 100 nm thick and illumina ted
by white light incident p erpendicular to its
surface. Wha t wavelength and c olor o f visible
light is mos t constructiv ely reflecte d, assuming
the same inde x of refraction as w ater?
40.An oil slick on w ater is 120 nm thick and
illumina ted by white light incident
perpendicular to its sur face. Wha t color do es
the oil app ear (wha t is the mos t constructiv ely
reflecte d wavelength), giv en its inde x of
refraction is 1.40?
41.Calcula te the minimum thicknes s of an oil slick
on w ater tha t app ears blue when illumina ted by
white light p erpendicular to its sur face. Take
the blue w avelength to b e 470 nm and the inde x
of refraction o f oil to b e 1.40.
42.Find the minimum thicknes s of a so ap bubble
that app ears re d when illumina ted by white
light p erpendicular to its sur face. Take the
wavelength to b e 680 nm , and as sume the same
inde x of refraction as w ater.
43.A film o f soapy water ( ) on top o f a
plas tic cut ting b oard has a thicknes s of 233 nm .
Wha t color is mos t strongly reflecte d if it is
illumina ted perpendicular to its sur face?
44.Wha t are the three smalles t non-z ero
thicknes ses o f soapy water ( ) on
Plexiglas if it app ears green (c onstructiv ely
reflecting 520-nm light) when illumina ted
perpendicularly b y white light?
45.Supp ose y ou ha ve a lens s ystem tha t is to b e
used primarily f or 700-nm re d light . Wha t is the
second thinnes t coating o f fluorite (ma gnesium
fluoride) tha t would b e nonreflectiv e for this
wavelength?
46.(a) As a so ap bubble thins it b ecomes dark ,
because the p ath length diff erenc e becomes
small c omp ared with the w avelength o f light
and there is a phase shift a t the top sur face. If itbecomes dark when the p ath length diff erenc e
is les s than one -fourth the w avelength , wha t is
the thick est the bubble c an b e and app ear dark
at all visible w avelengths? As sume the same
inde x of refraction as w ater. (b) Discus s the
fragility o f the film c onsidering the thicknes s
found .
47.To sa ve mone y on making militar y aircra ft
invisible to radar , an in ventor decides to c oat
them with a nonreflectiv e ma terial ha ving an
inde x of refraction o f 1.20, which is b etween
that of air and the sur face of the plane . This , he
reasons , should b e much che aper than
designing Ste alth b omb ers. (a) Wha t thicknes s
should the c oating b e to inhibit the reflection o f
4.00- cm w avelength radar? ( b) Wha t is
unre asona ble a bout this result? (c) Which
assumptions are unre asona ble or inc onsis tent?
3.5The Michelson Inter ferometer
48.A Michelson inter ferometer has tw o equal arms .
A mercur y light o f wavelength 546 nm is use d
for the inter ferometer and s table fring es are
found . One o f the arms is mo ved by . Ho w
man y fring es will cros s the obser ving field?
49.Wha t is the dis tanc e mo ved by the tra veling
mirror o f a Michelson inter ferometer tha t
corresp onds to 1500 fring es p assing b y a p oint
of the obser vation screen? As sume tha t the
inter ferometer is illumina ted with a 606 nm
spectral line o f krypton-86.
50.When the tra veling mirror o f a Michelson
inter ferometer is mo ved , 90
fring es p ass by a p oint on the obser vation
screen . Wha t is the w avelength o f the light
used?
51.In a Michelson inter ferometer , light o f
wavelength 632.8 nm from a He -Ne laser is
used. When one o f the mirrors is mo ved by a
distanc eD, 8 fring es mo ve past the field o f view .
Wha t is the v alue o f the dis tanc eD?
52.A chamb er 5.0 cm long with fla t, parallel windo ws at
the ends is plac ed in one arm o f a Michelson
inter ferometer (see b elow). The light use d has a
wavelength o f 500 nm in a v acuum . While all the air
is being pump ed out o f the chamb er, 29 fring es p ass
by a p oint on the obser vation screen . Wha t is the
refractiv e inde x of the air?3 • Chap ter Re view 135

Additional P roblems
53.For 600-nm w avelength light and a slit
separation o f 0.12 mm , wha t are the angular
positions o f the firs t and third maxima in the
double slit inter ferenc e pattern?
54.If the light sourc e in the prec eding problem is
chang ed, the angular p osition o f the third
maximum is f ound to b e . Wha t is the
wavelength o f light b eing use d no w?
55.Red light ( ) illumina tes double slits
separated by a dis tanc e The
screen and the slits are 3.00 m ap art. (a) F ind
the dis tanc e on the screen b etween the c entral
maximum and the third maximum . (b) Wha t is
the dis tanc e between the sec ond and the f ourth
maxima?
56.Two sourc es as in phase and emit w aves with
. Determine whether c onstructiv e or
destructiv e inter ferenc e occurs a t points whose
distanc es from the tw o sourc es are (a) 0.84 and
0.42 m , (b) 0.21 and 0.42 m , (c) 1.26 and 0.42 m ,
(d) 1.87 and 1.45 m , (e) 0.63 and 0.84 m and (f )
1.47 and 1.26 m .
57.Two slits apart are illumina ted
by light o f wavelength 600 nm . Wha t is the
highes t order fring e in the inter ferenc e pattern?
58.Supp ose tha t the highes t order fring e tha t can
be obser ved is the eighth in a double -slit
experiment where 550-nm w avelength light is
used. Wha t is the minimum sep aration o f the
slits?
59.The inter ferenc e pattern o f a He -Ne laser light
passing through tw o slits 0.031
mm ap art is projecte d on a screen 10.0 m a way.
Determine the dis tanc e between the adjac ent
bright fring es.60.Young ’s double -slit e xperiment is p erforme d
immerse d in w ater ( ). The light sourc e
is a He -Ne laser , in vacuum . (a)
Wha t is the w avelength o f this light in w ater? ( b)
Wha t is the angle f or the third order maximum
for tw o slits sep arated by 0.100 mm .
61.A double -slit e xperiment is to b e set up so tha t
the bright fring es app ear 1.27 cm ap art on a
screen 2.13 m a way from the tw o slits . The light
sourc e was w avelength 500 nm . Wha t should b e
the sep aration b etween the tw o slits?
62.An eff ect analog ous to tw o-slit inter ferenc e can
occur with sound w aves, ins tead o f light . In an
open field , two sp eakers plac ed 1.30 m ap art
are p owered by a single -function g enera tor
producing sine w aves a t 1200-Hz fre quency . A
student w alks along a line 12.5 m a way and
parallel to the line b etween the sp eakers. She
hears an alterna ting p attern o f loud and quiet ,
due to c onstructiv e and des tructiv e
inter ferenc e. Wha t is (a) the w avelength o f this
sound and ( b) the dis tanc e between the c entral
maximum and the firs t maximum ( loud)
position along this line?
63.A hydrog en g as discharg e lamp emits visible
light a t four w avelengths , 410, 434, 486,
and 656 nm . (a) If light from this lamp falls on a
Nslits sep arated by 0.025 mm , how far from the
central maximum are the third maxima when
view ed on a screen 2.0 m from the slits? ( b) B y
wha t dis tanc e are the sec ond and third maxima
separated for ?
64.Mono chroma tic light o f fre quency
falls on 10 slits sep arated by
0.020 mm . Wha t is the sep aration b etween the
first and third maxima on a screen tha t is 2.0 m
from the slits?136 3 • Chap ter Re view
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

65.Eight slits e qually sep arated by 0.149 mm is
unif ormly illumina ted by a mono chroma tic
light a t . Wha t is the width o f the
central princip al maximum on a screen 2.35 m
away?
66.Eight slits e qually sep arated by 0.149 mm is
unif ormly illumina ted by a mono chroma tic
light a t . Wha t is the intensity o f a
secondar y maxima c omp ared to tha t of the
princip al maxima?
67.A transp arent film o f thicknes s 250 nm and
inde x of refraction o f 1.40 is surrounde d by air .
Wha t wavelength in a b eam o f white light a t
near-normal incidenc e to the film underg oes
destructiv e inter ferenc e when reflecte d?
68.An intensity minimum is f ound f or 450 nm light
transmit ted through a transp arent film
in air . (a) Wha t is minimum thicknes s
of the film? ( b) If this w avelength is the long est
for which the intensity minimum o ccurs , wha t
are the ne xt three lo wer values o ffor which
this happ ens?
69.A thin film with is surrounde d by air .
Wha t is the minimum thicknes s of this film
such tha t the reflection o f normally incident
light with is minimiz ed?
70.Repeat your c alcula tion o f the previous problem
with the thin film plac ed on a fla t glas s
( ) sur face.
71.After a minor oil spill , a think film o f oil
( ) of thicknes s 450 nm flo ats on the
water sur face in a b ay. (a) Wha t pre dominant
color is seen b y a bird flying o verhe ad? ( b) Wha t
predominant c olor is seen b y a se al swimming
under water?
72.A microsc ope slide 10 cm long is sep arated from a
glas s pla te at one end b y a sheet o f paper. As
shown b elow, the other end o f the slide is in
contact with the pla te. The slide is illumina ted
from a bove by light from a so dium lamp
( ), and 14 fring es p er centimeter are
seen along the slide . Wha t is the thicknes s of the
piec e of paper?
73.Supp ose tha t the setup o f the prec eding
problem is immerse d in an unkno wn liquid . If
18 fring es p er centimeter are no w seen along
the slide , wha t is the inde x of refraction o f the
liquid?
74.A thin w edge fille d with air is pro duced when
two fla t glas s pla tes are plac ed on top o f one
another and a slip o f paper is inser ted between
them a t one e dge. Inter ferenc e fring es are
obser ved when mono chroma tic light falling
vertically on the pla tes are seen in reflection . Is
the firs t fring e ne ar the e dge where the pla tes
are in c ontact a bright fring e or a dark fring e?
Explain .
75.Two identic al piec es o f rectangular pla te glas s
are use d to me asure the thicknes s of a hair . The
glas s pla tes are in direct c ontact a t one e dge and
a single hair is plac ed between them he ar the
opp osite e dge. When illumina ted with a so dium
lamp ( ), the hair is seen b etween the
180th and 181s t dark fring es. Wha t are the
lower and upp er limits on the hair ’s diameter?
76.Two microsc ope slides made o f glas s are
illumina ted by mono chroma tic ( )
light incident p erpendicularly . The top slide
touches the b ottom slide a t one end and res ts on
a thin c opp er wire a t the other end , forming a
wedge of air . The diameter o f the c opp er wire is
. Ho w man y bright fring es are seen
acros s these slides?
77.A good quality c amera “lens” is actually a
system o f lenses , rather than a single lens , but a
side eff ect is tha t a reflection from the sur face of
one lens c an b ounc e around man y times within
the s ystem , cre ating ar tifacts in the photograph .
To counteract this problem , one o f the lenses in
such a s ystem is c oated with a thin la yer o f
material ( ) on one side . The inde x of
refraction o f the lens glas s is 1.68. Wha t is the
smalles t thicknes s of the c oating tha t reduces
the reflection a t 640 nm b y des tructiv e
inter ferenc e? (In other w ords , the c oating ’s
effect is to b e optimiz ed for .)
78.Constructiv e inter ferenc e is obser ved from
directly a bove an oil slick f or w avelengths (in
air) 440 nm and 616 nm . The inde x of refraction
of this oil is . Wha t is the film ’s
minimum p ossible thicknes s?
79.A so ap bubble is blo wn outdo ors. Wha t colors
(indic ate by wavelengths) o f the reflecte d
sunlight are seen enhanc ed? The so ap bubble
has inde x of refraction 1.36 and thicknes s 380
nm.3 • Chap ter Re view 137

80.A Michelson inter ferometer with a He -Ne laser
light sourc e ( ) projects its
inter ferenc e pattern on a screen . If the mo vable
mirror is c aused to mo ve by , how man y
fring es will b e obser ved shifting through a
referenc e point on a screen?
81.An e xperimenter detects 251 fring es when the
movable mirror in a Michelson inter ferometer
is displac ed. The light sourc e use d is a so dium
lamp , wavelength 589 nm . By wha t dis tanc e did
the mo vable mirror mo ve?
82.A Michelson inter ferometer is use d to me asure
the w avelength o f light put through it . When the
movable mirror is mo ved by exactly 0.100 mm ,
the numb er o f fring es obser ved mo ving through
is 316. Wha t is the w avelength o f the light?
83.A 5.08- cm-long rectangular glas s chamb er is
inser ted into one arm o f a Michelson
inter ferometer using a 633-nm light sourc e.
This chamb er is initially fille d with air
at standard a tmospheric
pres sure but the air is gradually pump ed out
using a v acuum pump until a ne ar p erfect
vacuum is achiev ed. Ho w man y fring es are
obser ved mo ving b y during the transition?
84.Into one arm o f a Michelson inter ferometer , a
plas tic sheet o f thicknes s is inser ted,
which c auses a shift in the inter ferenc e pattern
by 86 fring es. The light sourc e has w avelength
of 610 nm in air . Wha t is the inde x of refraction
of this plas tic?85.The thicknes s of an aluminum f oil is me asure d
using a Michelson inter ferometer tha t has its
movable mirror mounte d on a micrometer .
There is a diff erenc e of 27 fring es in the
obser ved inter ferenc e pattern when the
micrometer clamps do wn on the f oil c omp ared
to when the micrometer is empty . The light
sourc e is a He -Ne laser with w avelength 632.8
nm. Calcula te the thicknes s of the f oil.
86.The mo vable mirror o f a Michelson
inter ferometer is a ttache d to one end o f a thin
metal ro d of length 23.3 mm . The other end o f
the ro d is anchore d so it do es not mo ve. As the
temp erature o f the ro d chang es from to
, a chang e of 14 fring es is obser ved. The
light sourc e is a He N e laser , .
Wha t is the chang e in length o f the metal b ar,
and wha t is its thermal e xpansion c oefficient?
87.In a thermally s tabiliz ed lab, a Michelson
inter ferometer is use d to monitor the
temp erature to ensure it s tays constant . The
movable mirror is mounte d on the end o f a
1.00-m-long aluminum ro d, held fix ed at the
other end . The light sourc e is a He N e laser ,
. The resolution o f this app aratus
corresp onds to the temp erature diff erenc e
when a chang e of jus t one fring e is obser ved.
Wha t is this temp erature diff erenc e?
88.A 65- fring e shift results in a Michelson
inter ferometer when a film made o f an
unkno wn ma terial is plac ed in one arm . The
light sourc e has w avelength 632.9 nm . Identif y
the ma terial using the indic es o f refraction
found in Table 1.1 .
Challenge P roblems
89.Determine wha t happ ens to the double -slit
inter ferenc e pattern if one o f the slits is c overed
with a thin , transp arent film whose thicknes s is
, where is the w avelength o f the
incident light and nis the inde x of refraction o f
the film .
90.Fifty-one narro w slits are e qually sp aced and
separated by 0.10 mm . The slits are illumina ted
by blue light o f wavelength 400 nm . Wha t is
angular p osition o f the tw enty -fifth sec ondar y
maximum? Wha t is its p eak intensity in
comp arison with tha t of the primar y maximum?91.A film o f oil on w ater will app ear dark when it is
very thin , because the p ath length diff erenc e
becomes small c omp ared with the w avelength
of light and there is a phase shift a t the top
surface. If it b ecomes dark when the p ath length
differenc e is les s than one -fourth the
wavelength , wha t is the thick est the oil c an b e
and app ear dark a t all visible w avelengths? Oil
has an inde x of refraction o f 1.40.138 3 • Chap ter Re view
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

92.Figure 3.14 shows tw o glas s slides illumina ted
by mono chroma tic light incident
perpendicularly . The top slide touches the
bottom slide a t one end and res ts on a
0.100-mm-diameter hair a t the other end ,
forming a w edge of air . (a) Ho w far ap art are the
dark b ands , if the slides are 7.50 cm long and
589-nm light is use d? (b) Is there an y diff erenc e
if the slides are made from cro wn or flint glas s?
Explain .
93.Figure 3.14 shows tw o 7.50- cm-long glas s slides
illumina ted by pure 589-nm w avelength light
incident p erpendicularly . The top slide touches
the b ottom slide a t one end and res ts on some
debris a t the other end , forming a w edge of air .
How thick is the debris , if the dark b ands are
1.00 mm ap art?94.A so ap bubble is 100 nm thick and illumina ted
by white light incident a t a angle to its
surface. Wha t wavelength and c olor o f visible
light is mos t constructiv ely reflecte d, assuming
the same inde x of refraction as w ater?
95.An oil slick on w ater is 120 nm thick and
illumina ted by white light incident a t a
angle to its sur face. Wha t color do es the oil
app ear (wha t is the mos t constructiv ely
reflecte d wavelength), giv en its inde x of
refraction is 1.40?3 • Chap ter Re view 139

140 3 • Chap ter Re view
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

INTR ODUCTIONCHAP TER 4
Diffr action
4.1Single -Slit Dif fraction
4.2Intensit y in Single -Slit Dif fraction
4.3Double -Slit Dif fraction
4.4Diffraction Gr atings
4.5Circular Aper tures and Resolution
4.6X-Ray Dif fraction
4.7Hologr aphy
Ima gine p assing a mono chroma tic light b eam through a narro w op ening—a slit jus t a lit tle
wider than the w avelength o f the light . Ins tead o f a simple shado w of the slit on the screen , you will see tha t an
inter ferenc e pattern app ears, even though there is only one slit .
In the chapter on inter ferenc e, we sa w tha t you nee d tw o sourc es o f waves for inter ferenc e to o ccur. Ho w can
Figur e4.1 A steel bal l bearing il luminat ed b y a laser does not cas t a sharp , circular shado w. Ins tead, a series o f
diffr action fring es and a c entr al bright spot ar e obser ved. K nown as Poisson’s spot , the eff ect w as firs t predict ed b y
Augustin-Jean Fresnel (1788–1827) as a c onsequenc e of diffr action o f light w aves. Based on principles o f ray
optics, Siméon-Denis P oisson (1781–1840) ar gued ag ains t Fresnel ’s prediction. (cr edit: modification o f work b y
Harvard Natur al Scienc e Lectur e Demons trations)
Chap ter Outline

there b e an inter ferenc e pattern when w e ha ve only one slit? In The N ature o f Light , we learne d tha t, due to
Huy gens’ s principle , we can ima gine a w ave front as e quiv alent to infinitely man y point sourc es o f waves.
Thus , a w ave from a slit c an b ehave not as one w ave but as an infinite numb er o f point sourc es. These w aves
can inter fere with e ach other , resulting in an inter ferenc e pattern without the presenc e of a sec ond slit . This
phenomenon is c alleddiffraction .
Another w ay to view this is to rec ogniz e tha t a slit has a small but finite width . In the prec eding chapter , we
implicitly reg arde d slits as objects with p ositions but no siz e. The widths o f the slits w ere c onsidere d
negligible . When the slits ha ve finite widths , each p oint along the op ening c an b e considere d a p oint sourc e of
light —a f ounda tion o f Huy gens’ s principle . Bec ause re al-w orld optic al ins truments mus t ha ve finite ap ertures
(other wise , no light c an enter), diffraction pla ys a major role in the w ay we interpret the output o f these optic al
instruments . For e xample , diffraction plac es limits on our a bility to resolv e ima ges or objects . This is a
problem tha t we will s tudy la ter in this chapter .
4.1Single -Slit Dif fraction
Learning Objectiv es
By the end o f this section, y ou wil l be able t o:
•Explain the phenomenon o f diffraction and the conditions under which it is obser ved
•Describe dif fraction thr ough a single slit
After p assing through a narro w ap erture (op ening ), a w ave prop agating in a sp ecific direction tends to spre ad
out. For e xample , sound w aves tha t enter a ro om through an op en do or c an b e he ard ev en if the lis tener is in a
part of the ro om where the g eometr y of ray prop agation dicta tes tha t there should only b e silenc e. Similarly ,
ocean w aves p assing through an op ening in a bre akw ater c an spre ad throughout the b ay inside . (Figure 4.2 ).
The spre ading and b ending o f sound and o cean w aves are tw o examples o fdiffract ion, which is the b ending o f
a wave around the e dges o f an op ening or an obs tacle —a phenomenon e xhibite d by all typ es o f waves.
Figur e4.2 Because o f the diffr action o f waves, ocean w aves ent ering thr ough an opening in a br eakw ater can spr ead thr oughout the ba y.
(credit: modification o f map data fr om Google Ear th)
The diffraction o f sound w aves is app arent to us b ecause w avelengths in the a udible region are appro xima tely
the same siz e as the objects the y enc ounter , a c ondition tha t mus t be sa tisfied if diffraction eff ects are to b e
obser ved easily . Sinc e the w avelengths o f visible light rang e from appro xima tely 390 to 770 nm , mos t objects
do not diffract light signific antly . Ho wever, situa tions do o ccur in which ap ertures are small enough tha t the
diffraction o f light is obser vable. For e xample , if y ou plac e your middle and inde x fing ers close tog ether and
look through the op ening a t a light bulb , you c an see a ra ther cle ar diffraction p attern , consis ting o f light and
dark lines r unning p arallel to y our fing ers.
Diffraction thr ough a Single Slit
Light p assing through a single slit f orms a diffraction p attern somewha t diff erent from those f orme d by double
slits or diffraction gra tings , which w e discus sed in the chapter on inter ferenc e.Figure 4.3 shows asingle -slit
diffraction p attern . Note tha t the c entral maximum is larg er than maxima on either side and tha t the intensity142 4 • Dif fraction
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

decre ases rapidly on either side . In c ontras t, a diffraction gra ting ( Diffraction Gra tings ) pro duces ev enly
spaced lines tha t dim slo wly on either side o f the c enter .
Figur e4.3 Single -slit diffr action pat tern. (a) Monochr omatic light pas sing thr ough a single slit has a c entr al maximum and man y smal ler
and dimmer maxima on either side . The c entr al maximum is six times higher than sho wn. (b) The diagr am sho ws the bright c entr al
maximum, and the dimmer and thinner maxima on either side .
The analy sis o f single -slit diffraction is illus trated in Figure 4.4 . Here , the light arriv es a t the slit , illumina ting it
unif ormly and is in phase acros s its width . We then c onsider light prop agating on wards from diff erent p arts of
the same slit. According to Huy gens’ s principle , every part of the w ave front in the slit emits w avelets , as w e
discus sed in The N ature o f Light . These are lik e ra ys tha t start out in phase and he ad in all directions . (Each ra y
is perpendicular to the w ave front o f a w avelet.) As suming the screen is v ery far a way comp ared with the siz e
of the slit , rays he ading to ward a c ommon des tina tion are ne arly p arallel . When the y tra vel straight ahe ad, as
in p art (a) o f the figure , the y remain in phase , and w e obser ve a c entral maximum . Ho wever, when ra ys tra vel
at an angle rela tive to the original direction o f the b eam, each ra y tra vels a diff erent dis tanc e to a c ommon
location , and the y can arriv e in or out o f phase . In p art (b), the ra y from the b ottom tra vels a dis tanc e of one
wavelength farther than the ra y from the top . Thus , a ra y from the c enter tra vels a dis tanc e less than the
one a t the b ottom e dge of the slit , arriv es out o f phase , and inter feres des tructiv ely. A ra y from slightly a bove
the c enter and one from slightly a bove the b ottom also c ancel one another . In fact , each ra y from the slit
inter feres des tructiv ely with another ra y. In other w ords , a p air-wise c ancellation o f all ra ys results in a dark
minimum in intensity a t this angle . By symmetr y, another minimum o ccurs a t the same angle to the right o f
the incident direction (to ward the b ottom o f the figure) o f the light .4.1 • Single -Slit Dif fraction 143

Figur e4.4 Light pas sing thr ough a single slit is diffr acted in al l directions and ma y int erfere constructiv ely or des tructiv ely, depending on
the angle . The diff erence in path length f or rays from either side o f the slit is seen t o be asin .
At the larg er angle sho wn in p art (c), the p ath lengths diff er b y for ra ys from the top and b ottom o f the slit .
One ra y tra vels a dis tanc edifferent from the ra y from the b ottom and arriv es in phase , inter fering
constructiv ely. Tw o ra ys, each from slightly a bove those tw o, also add c onstructiv ely. Mos t rays from the slit
have another ra y to inter fere with c onstructiv ely, and a maximum in intensity o ccurs a t this angle . Ho wever,
not all ra ys inter fere c onstructiv ely f or this situa tion , so the maximum is not as intense as the c entral
maximum . Finally , in p art (d), the angle sho wn is larg e enough to pro duce a sec ond minimum . As seen in the
figure , the diff erenc e in p ath length f or ra ys from either side o f the slit is asin , and w e see tha t a des tructiv e
minimum is obtaine d when this dis tanc e is an integral multiple o f the w avelength .
Thus , to obtain destructive inter ferenc e for a single slit ,
where ais the slit width ,is the light ’s wavelength ,is the angle rela tive to the original direction o f the light ,
and mis the order o f the minimum .Figure 4.5 shows a graph o f intensity f or single -slit inter ferenc e, and it is
app arent tha t the maxima on either side o f the c entral maximum are much les s intense and not as wide . This
effect is e xplore d in Double -Slit Diffraction .4.1144 4 • Dif fraction
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Figur e4.5 A graph o f single -slit diffr action int ensity sho wing the c entr al maximum t o be wider and much mor e int ense than those t o the
sides . In fact, the c entr al maximum is six times higher than sho wn her e.
EXAMPLE 4.1
Calcula ting Single -Slit Dif fraction
Visible light o f wavelength 550 nm falls on a single slit and pro duces its sec ond diffraction minimum a t an
angle o f rela tive to the incident direction o f the light , as in Figure 4.6 . (a) Wha t is the width o f the slit? ( b)
At wha t angle is the firs t minimum pro duced?
Figur e4.6 In this e xample , we anal yze a gr aph o f the single -slit diffr action pat tern.
Strategy
From the giv en inf orma tion , and as suming the screen is far a way from the slit , we can use the e qua tion
first to find D, and a gain to find the angle f or the firs t minimum
Solution
a.We are giv en tha t , , and . Solving the e qua tion foraand
subs tituting kno wn v alues giv es4.1 • Single -Slit Dif fraction 145

b.Solving the e qua tion for and subs tituting the kno wn v alues giv es
Thus the angle is
Significanc e
We see tha t the slit is narro w (it is only a f ew times gre ater than the w avelength o f light). This is c onsis tent with
the fact tha t light mus t interact with an object c omp arable in siz e to its w avelength in order to e xhibit
signific ant w ave eff ects such as this single -slit diffraction p attern . We also see tha t the c entral maximum
extends on either side o f the original b eam, for a width o f about . The angle b etween the firs t and
second minima is only a bout . Thus , the sec ond maximum is only a bout half as wide as the
central maximum .
CHE CK Y OUR UNDER STANDING 4.1
Supp ose the slit width in Example 4.1 is incre ased to Wha t are the new angular p ositions f or
the firs t, sec ond , and third minima? W ould a f ourth minimum e xist?
4.2Intensit y in Single -Slit Dif fraction
Learning Objectiv es
By the end o f this section, y ou wil l be able t o:
•Calculate the intensit y relativ e to the centr al maximum o f the single -slit dif fraction peak s
•Calculate the intensit y relativ e to the centr al maximum o f an arbitr ary point on the scr een
To calcula te the intensity o f the diffraction p attern , we follow the phasor metho d use d for c alcula tions with ac
circuits in Alterna ting-Current Circuits . If w e consider tha t there are NHuy gens sourc es acros s the slit sho wn
inFigure 4.4 , with e ach sourc e sep arated by a dis tanc ea/Nfrom its adjac ent neighb ors, the p ath diff erenc e
between w aves from adjac ent sourc es re aching the arbitrar y point Pon the screen is This dis tanc e
is equiv alent to a phase diff erenc e of The phasor dia gram for the w aves arriving a t the p oint
whose angular p osition is is sho wn in Figure 4.7 . The amplitude o f the phasor f or e ach Huy gens w avelet is
the amplitude o f the resultant phasor is E, and the phase diff erenc e between the w avelets from the firs t
and the las t sourc es is
With ∞, the phasor dia gram appro aches a circular arc o f length and radius r. Sinc e the length o f
the arc is for an y, the radius rof the arc mus t decre ase as incre ases (or e quiv alently , as the phasors
form tighter spirals).146 4 • Dif fraction
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Figur e4.7 (a) Phasor diagr am c orresponding t o the ang ular position in the single -slit diffr action pat tern. The phase diff erence betw een
the w avelets fr om the firs t and las t sour ces is . (b) The g eometr y of the phasor diagr am.
The phasor dia gram f or (the c enter o f the diffraction p attern) is sho wn in Figure 4.8 (a) using . In
this c ase, the phasors are laid end to end in a s traight line o f length the radius rgoes to infinity , and the
resultant has its maximum v alue The intensity o f the light c an b e obtaine d using the rela tion
from Electroma gnetic W aves. The intensity o f the maximum is then
where . The phasor dia grams f or the firs t two zeros o f the diffraction p attern are sho wn in p arts (b)
and (d) o f the figure . In b oth c ases , the phasors add to z ero, after rota ting through rad f or and
rad f or .
Figur e4.8 Phasor diagr ams (with 30 phasors) f or various points on the single -slit diffr action pat tern. Mul tiple r otations ar ound a giv en
circle ha ve been separ ated slightl y so that the phasors can be seen. (a) Centr al maximum, (b) firs t minimum, (c) firs t maximum be yond
centr al maximum, (d) sec ond minimum, and (e) sec ond maximum be yond c entr al maximum.
The ne xt tw o maxima b eyond the c entral maxima are represente d by the phasor dia grams o f parts (c) and (e).
In p art (c), the phasors ha ve rota ted through rad and ha ve forme d a resultant phasor o f ma gnitude .
The length o f the arc f orme d by the phasors is Sinc e this c orresp onds to 1.5 rota tions around a circle
of diameter , we ha ve
so4.2 • Intensit y in Single -Slit Dif fraction 147

and
where
In p art (e), the phasors ha ve rota ted through rad, corresp onding to 2.5 rota tions around a circle o f
diameter and arc length This results in . The pro of is left as an e xercise f or the
student ( Exercise 4.119 ).
These tw o maxima actually c orresp ond to v alues o fslightly les s than rad and rad. Sinc e the total
length o f the arc o f the phasor dia gram is alw ays the radius o f the arc decre ases as incre ases . As a
result , and turn out to b e slightly larg er for arcs tha t ha ve not quite curle d through rad and rad,
resp ectiv ely. The e xact v alues o ffor the maxima are in vestigated in Exercise 4.120 . In solving tha t problem ,
you will find tha t the y are les s than , but v ery close to ,
To calcula te the intensity a t an arbitrar y point Pon the screen , we return to the phasor dia gram o fFigure 4.7 .
Sinc e the arc subtends an angle at the c enter o f the circle ,
and
where Eis the amplitude o f the resultant field . Solving the sec ond e qua tion f orEand then subs tituting rfrom
the firs t equa tion , we find
Now defining
we obtain
This e qua tion rela tes the amplitude o f the resultant field a t an y point in the diffraction p attern to the
amplitude at the c entral maximum . The intensity is prop ortional to the square o f the amplitude , so
where is the intensity a t the c enter o f the p attern .
For the c entral maximum , ,is also z ero and w e see from l ’Hôpital ’s rule tha t so
that For the ne xt maximum , rad, we ha ve rad and when subs titute d into
Equa tion 4.4 , it yields4.2
4.3
4.4148 4 • Dif fraction
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

in agreement with wha t we found e arlier in this section using the diameters and circumf erenc es o f phasor
diagrams . Subs tituting rad into Equa tion 4.4 yields a similar result f or .
A plot o fEqua tion 4.4 is sho wn in Figure 4.9 and directly b elow it is a photograph o f an actual diffraction
pattern . Notice tha t the c entral p eak is much brighter than the others , and tha t the z eros o f the p attern are
located at those p oints where which o ccurs when rad. This c orresp onds to
or
which is Equa tion 4.1 .
Figur e4.9 (a) The calculat ed int ensity dis tribution o f a single -slit diffr action pat tern. (b) The actual diffr action pat tern.
EXAMPLE 4.2
Intensity in Single -Slit Dif fraction
Light o f wavelength 550 nm p asses through a slit o f width and pro duces a diffraction p attern similar
to tha t sho wn in Figure 4.9 . (a) F ind the lo cations o f the firs t two minima in terms o f the angle from the c entral
maximum and ( b) determine the intensity rela tive to the c entral maximum a t a p oint halfw ay between these
two minima.
Strategy
The minima are giv en b yEqua tion 4.1 , . The firs t two minima are f or and Equa tion4.2 • Intensit y in Single -Slit Dif fraction 149

4.4and Equa tion 4.2 can b e use d to determine the intensity onc e the angle has b een w orked out .
Solution
a.Solving Equa tion 4.1 for gives us so tha t
and
b.The halfw ay point b etween and is
Equa tion 4.2 gives
From Equa tion 4.4 , we can c alcula te
Significanc e
This p osition , halfw ay between tw o minima, is v ery close to the lo cation o f the maximum , expecte d ne ar
.
CHE CK Y OUR UNDER STANDING 4.2
For the e xperiment in Example 4.2 , at wha t angle from the c enter is the third maximum and wha t is its
intensity rela tive to the c entral maximum?
If the slit width ais varie d, the intensity dis tribution chang es, as illus trated in Figure 4.10 . The c entral p eak is
distribute d over the region from to . For small , this c orresp onds to an angular
width Henc e, an incre ase in the slit width results in a decre ase in the width of the c entral p eak.
For a slit with the c entral p eak is v ery sharp , where as if , it b ecomes quite bro ad.
Figur e4.10 Single -slit diffr action pat terns f or various slit widths . As the slit width aincreases fr om and then t o , the width
of the c entr al peak decr eases as the angles f or the firs t minima decr ease as pr edict ed b yEquation 4.1 .150 4 • Dif fraction
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

INTER ACTIVE
A diffraction e xperiment in optics c an re quire a lot o f prep aration but this simula tion (https:/ /openstax.org/l/
21diffre xpoptsi) by Andrew Duff y offers not only a quick set up but also the a bility to chang e the slit width
instantly . Run the simula tion and select “ Single slit .” You c an adjus t the slit width and see the eff ect on the
diffraction p attern on a screen and as a graph .
4.3Double -Slit Dif fraction
Learning Objectiv es
By the end o f this section, y ou wil l be able t o:
•Describe the combined e ffect of inter ference and dif fraction with t wo slits , each with finite width
•Determine the r elativ e intensities o f inter ference fringes within a dif fraction pat tern
•Identif y missing or ders, if any
When w e studie d inter ferenc e in Y oung ’s double -slit e xperiment , we ignore d the diffraction eff ect in e ach slit .
We as sume d tha t the slits w ere so narro w tha t on the screen y ou sa w only the inter ferenc e of light from jus t
two point sourc es. If the slit is smaller than the w avelength , then Figure 4.10 (a) sho ws tha t there is jus t a
spre ading o f light and no p eaks or troughs on the screen . Theref ore, it w as re asona ble to le ave out the
diffraction eff ect in tha t chapter . Ho wever, if y ou mak e the slit wider ,Figure 4.10 (b) and (c) sho w tha t you
cannot ignore diffraction . In this section , we study the c omplic ations to the double -slit e xperiment tha t arise
when y ou also nee d to tak e into ac count the diffraction eff ect o f each slit .
To calcula te the diffraction p attern f or tw o (or an y numb er o f) slits , we nee d to g eneraliz e the metho d we jus t
used for a single slit . Tha t is, acros s each slit , we plac e a unif orm dis tribution o f point sourc es tha t radia te
Huy gens w avelets , and then w e sum the w avelets from all the slits . This giv es the intensity a t an y point on the
screen . Although the details o f tha t calcula tion c an b e complic ated, the final result is quite simple:
In other w ords , the locations of the inter ferenc e fring es are giv en b y the e qua tion , the same as
when w e considere d the slits to b e point sourc es, but the intensities of the fring es are no w re duced by
diffraction eff ects , according to Equa tion 4.4 . [Note tha t in the chapter on inter ferenc e, we wrote
and use d the integ ermto ref er to inter ferenc e fring es.Equa tion 4.1 also uses m, but this time to ref er to
diffraction minima. If b oth e qua tions are use d simultaneously , it is g ood practic e to use a diff erent v aria ble
(such as n) for one o f these integ ers in order to k eep them dis tinct .]
Inter ferenc e and diffraction eff ects op erate simultaneously and g enerally pro duce minima a t diff erent angles .
This giv es rise to a c omplic ated pattern on the screen , in which some o f the maxima o f inter ferenc e from the
two slits are mis sing if the maximum o f the inter ferenc e is in the same direction as the minimum o f the
diffraction . We ref er to such a mis sing p eak as a mis sing order . One e xample o f a diffraction p attern on the
screen is sho wn in Figure 4.11 . The solid line with multiple p eaks o f various heights is the intensity obser ved
on the screen . It is a pro duct o f the inter ferenc e pattern o f waves from sep arate slits and the diffraction o f
waves from within one slit .Two-Slit Dif fraction P attern
The diffraction p attern o f two slits o f width athat are sep arated by a dis tanc edis the inter ferenc e pattern
of two point sourc es sep arated bydmultiplie d by the diffraction p attern o f a slit o f width a.4.3 • Double -Slit Dif fraction 151

Figur e4.11 Diffr action fr om a double slit. The purple line with peak s of the same height ar e from the int erference of the w aves fr om tw o
slits; the blue line with one big hump in the middle is the diffr action o f waves fr om within one slit; and the thick r ed line is the pr oduct o f the
two, which is the pat tern obser ved on the scr een. The plot sho ws the e xpect ed resul t for a slit width and slit separ ation . The
maximum o f order f or the int erference is mis sing because the minimum o f the diffr action oc curs in the same dir ection.
EXAMPLE 4.3
Intensity o f the F ring es
Figure 4.11 shows tha t the intensity o f the fring e for is zero, but wha t about the other fring es? C alcula te
the intensity f or the fring e at rela tive to the intensity o f the c entral p eak.
Strategy
Determine the angle f or the double -slit inter ferenc e fring e, using the e qua tion from Inter ferenc e, then
determine the rela tive intensity in tha t direction due to diffraction b y using Equa tion 4.4 .
Solution
From the chapter on inter ferenc e, we kno w tha t the bright inter ferenc e fring es o ccur a t , or
From Equa tion 4.4 ,
Subs tituting from a bove,
For , , and ,
Then , the intensity is152 4 • Dif fraction
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Significanc e
Note tha t this appro ach is rela tively s traightf orward and giv es a result tha t is almos t exactly the same as the
more c omplic ated analy sis using phasors to w ork out the intensity v alues o f the double -slit inter ferenc e (thin
line in Figure 4.11 ). The phasor appro ach ac counts f or the do wnward slop e in the diffraction intensity ( blue
line) so tha t the p eaknear occurs a t a v alue o fever so slightly smaller than w e ha ve sho wn here .
EXAMPLE 4.4
Two-Slit Dif fraction
Supp ose tha t in Y oung ’s experiment , slits o f width 0.020 mm are sep arated by 0.20 mm . If the slits are
illumina ted by mono chroma tic light o f wavelength 500 nm , how man y bright fring es are obser ved in the
central p eak o f the diffraction p attern?
Solution
From Equa tion 4.1 , the angular p osition o f the firs t diffraction minimum is
Using for , we find
which is the maximum inter ferenc e order tha t fits inside the c entral p eak. We note tha t are mis sing
orders as matches e xactly . Accordingly , we obser ve bright fring es for
for a total o f 19 bright fring es.
CHE CK Y OUR UNDER STANDING 4.3
For the e xperiment in Example 4.4 , sho w tha t is also a mis sing order .
INTER ACTIVE
Explore the eff ects o f double -slit diffraction . Inthis simula tion (https:/ /openstax.org/l/21doubslitdiff )writ ten
by Fu-Kwun Hw ang , select using the slider and see wha t happ ens when y ou c ontrol the slit width , slit
separation and the w avelength . Can y ou mak e an order g o “mis sing? ”
4.4Diffraction Gr atings
Learning Objectiv es
By the end o f this section, y ou wil l be able t o:
•Discuss the pat tern ob tained fr om dif fraction gr atings
•Explain dif fraction gr ating e ffects
Analyzing the inter ferenc e of light p assing through tw o slits la ys out the theoretic al framew ork o f inter ferenc e
and giv es us a his toric al insight into Thomas Y oung ’s experiments . Ho wever, mos t mo dern-da y applic ations o f
slit inter ferenc e use not jus t two slits but man y, appro aching infinity f or practic al purp oses . The k ey optic al
element is c alled a diffraction gra ting , an imp ortant to ol in optic al analy sis.
Diffraction Gr atings: An Infinite Number o f Slits
The analy sis o f multi-slit inter ferenc e in Inter ferenc eallows us to c onsider wha t happ ens when the numb er o f4.4 • Dif fraction Gr atings 153

slits Nappro aches infinity . Recall tha t secondar y maxima app ear b etween the princip al maxima. W e can
see there will b e an infinite numb er o f sec ondar y maxima tha t app ear, and an infinite numb er o f dark fring es
between them . This mak es the sp acing b etween the fring es, and theref ore the width o f the maxima,
infinitesimally small . Furthermore , because the intensity o f the sec ondar y maxima is prop ortional to , it
appro aches z ero so tha t the sec ondar y maxima are no long er seen . Wha t remains are only the princip al
maxima, no w very bright and v ery narro w (Figure 4.12 ).
Figur e4.12 (a) Int ensity o f light tr ansmit ted thr ough a lar ge number o f slits . When Nappr oaches infinity , onl y the principal maxima
remain as v ery bright and v ery narr ow lines . (b) A laser beam pas sed thr ough a diffr action gr ating . (credit b: modification o f work b y
Sebas tian Stapelber g)
In re ality , the numb er o f slits is not infinite , but it c an b e very larg e—larg e enough to pro duce the e quiv alent
effect. A prime e xample is an optic al element c alled adiffract ion grat ing. A diffraction gra ting c an b e
manufacture d by carving glas s with a sharp to ol in a larg e numb er o f precisely p ositione d parallel lines , with
untouche d regions acting lik e slits ( Figure 4.13 ). This typ e of gra ting c an b e photographic ally mas s pro duced
rather che aply . Bec ause there c an b e over 1000 lines p er millimeter acros s the gra ting , when a section as small
as a f ew millimeters is illumina ted by an inc oming ra y, the numb er o f illumina ted slits is eff ectiv ely infinite ,
providing f or v ery sharp princip al maxima.154 4 • Dif fraction
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Figur e4.13 A diffr action gr ating can be manufactur ed b y car ving glas s with a sharp t ool in a lar ge number o f precisel y positioned par allel
lines .
Diffraction gra tings w ork b oth f or transmis sion o f light , as in Figure 4.14 , and f or reflection o f light , as on
butterfly wings and the A ustralian op al in Figure 4.15 . Natural diffraction gra tings also o ccur in the f eathers o f
certain birds such as the hummingbird . Tin y, fing er-like structures in regular p atterns act as reflection
gratings , pro ducing c onstructiv e inter ferenc e tha t giv es the f eathers c olors not solely due to their
pigmenta tion . This is c allediridesc ence.
Figur e4.14 (a) Light pas sing thr ough a diffr action gr ating is diffr acted in a pat tern similar t o a double slit, with bright r egions at v arious
angles . (b) The pat tern ob tained f or whit e light incident on a gr ating . The c entr al maximum is whit e, and the higher -order maxima disperse
whit e light int o a r ainbo w of colors .4.4 • Dif fraction Gr atings 155

Figur e4.15 (a) This Aus tralian opal and (b) but terfly wings ha ve rows of reflect ors that act lik e reflection gr atings , reflecting diff erent
colors at diff erent angles . (credit a: modification o f work b y "Opals -On-Black"/Flickr; cr edit b: modification o f work b y “wholog why”/Flickr)
Applications o f Diffraction Gr atings
Where are diffraction gra tings use d in applic ations? Diffraction gra tings are c ommonly use d forspectrosc opic
disp ersion and analy sis o f light . Wha t mak es them p articularly useful is the fact tha t the y form a sharp er
pattern than double slits do . Tha t is, their bright fring es are narro wer and brighter while their dark regions are
dark er. Diffraction gra tings are k ey comp onents o f mono chroma tors use d, for e xample , in optic al ima ging o f
particular w avelengths from biologic al or me dical samples . A diffraction gra ting c an b e chosen to sp ecific ally
analyz e a w avelength emit ted by molecules in dise ased cells in a biops y sample or to help e xcite s trategic
molecules in the sample with a selecte d wavelength o f light . Another vital use is in optic al fib er technologies
where fib ers are designe d to pro vide optimum p erformanc e at specific w avelengths . A rang e of diffraction
gratings are a vailable f or selecting w avelengths f or such use .
EXAMPLE 4.5
Calcula ting T ypical Dif fraction Gr ating Ef fects
Diffraction gra tings with 10,000 lines p er centimeter are re adily a vailable. Supp ose y ou ha ve one , and y ou
send a b eam o f white light through it to a screen 2.00 m a way. (a) F ind the angles f or the firs t-order diffraction
of the shor test and long est wavelengths o f visible light (380 and 760 nm , resp ectiv ely). (b) Wha t is the dis tanc e
between the ends o f the rainb ow of visible light pro duced on the screen f or firs t-order inter ferenc e? (See
Figure 4.16 .)156 4 • Dif fraction
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Figur e4.16 (a) The diffr action gr ating c onsider ed in this e xample pr oduc es a r ainbo w of colors on a scr een a dis tanc e from
the gr ating . The dis tanc es along the scr een ar e measur ed perpendicular t o the x-direction. In other w ords, the r ainbo w pat tern e xtends out
of the pag e.
(b) In a bir d’s-eye vie w, the r ainbo w pat tern can be seen on a table wher e the equipment is plac ed.
Strategy
Onc e a v alue f or the diffraction gra ting ’s slit sp acing dhas b een determine d, the angles f or the sharp lines c an
be found using the e qua tion
Sinc e there are 10,000 lines p er centimeter , each line is sep arated by 1/10,000 o f a c entimeter . Onc e we kno w
the angles , we an find the dis tanc es along the screen b y using simple trig onometr y.
Solution
a.The dis tanc e between slits is Let us c all the tw o
angles for violet (380 nm) and for re d (760 nm). Solving the e qua tion
where for the firs t-order and Subs tituting these v alues giv es
Thus the angle is
Similarly ,
Thus the angle is4.4 • Dif fraction Gr atings 157

Notice tha t in b oth e qua tions , we rep orted the results o f these interme diate calcula tions to f our signific ant
figures to use with the c alcula tion in p art (b).
b.The dis tanc es on the secreen are la beled inFigure 4.16 . Notice tha t We can solv e
for Tha t is,
and
The dis tanc e between them is theref ore
Significanc e
The larg e dis tanc e between the re d and violet ends o f the rainb ow pro duced from the white light indic ates the
potential this diffraction gra ting has as a sp ectrosc opic to ol. The more it c an spre ad out the w avelengths
(greater disp ersion), the more detail c an b e seen in a sp ectr um. This dep ends on the quality o f the diffraction
grating—it mus t be very precisely made in addition to ha ving closely sp aced lines .
CHE CK Y OUR UNDER STANDING 4.4
If the line sp acing o f a diffraction gra ting dis not precisely kno wn, we can use a light sourc e with a w ell-
determine d wavelength to me asure it . Supp ose the firs t-order c onstructiv e fring e of the emis sion line o f
hydrog en is me asure d at using a sp ectrometer with a diffraction gra ting . Wha t is the
line sp acing o f this gra ting?
INTER ACTIVE
Takethe same simula tion (https:/ /openstax.org/l/21doubslitdiff )we use d for double -slit diffraction and tr y
incre asing the numb er o f slits from to . The primar y peaks b ecome sharp er, and the
secondar y peaks b ecome les s and les s pronounc ed. By the time y ou re ach the maximum numb er o f ,
the s ystem is b ehaving much lik e a diffraction gra ting .
4.5Circular Aper tures and Resolution
Learning Objectiv es
By the end o f this section, y ou wil l be able t o:
•Describe the dif fraction limit on r esolution
•Describe the dif fraction limit on beam pr opagation
Light diffracts as it mo ves through sp ace, bending around obs tacles , inter fering c onstructiv ely and
destructiv ely. This c an b e use d as a sp ectrosc opic to ol—a diffraction gra ting disp erses light ac cording to
wavelength , for e xample , and is use d to pro duce sp ectra—but diffraction also limits the detail w e can obtain in
ima ges.
Figure 4.17 (a) sho ws the eff ect o f passing light through a small circular aperture . Ins tead o f a bright sp ot with
sharp e dges, we obtain a sp ot with a fuzzy e dge surrounde d by circles o f light . This p attern is c aused by
diffraction , similar to tha t pro duced by a single slit . Light from diff erent p arts of the circular ap erture
inter feres c onstructiv ely and des tructiv ely. The eff ect is mos t notic eable when the ap erture is small , but the
effect is there f or larg e ap ertures as w ell.158 4 • Dif fraction
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Figur e4.17 (a) Monochr omatic light pas sed thr ough a smal l circular aper ture produc es this diffr action pat tern. (b) T wo point -light
sour ces that ar e close t o one another pr oduc e overlapping imag es because o f diffr action. (c) If the sour ces ar e closer t ogether , the y cannot
be dis tinguished or r esol ved.
How do es diffraction a ffect the detail tha t can b e obser ved when light p asses through an ap erture? Figure
4.17 (b) sho ws the diffraction p attern pro duced by tw o point -light sourc es tha t are close to one another . The
pattern is similar to tha t for a single p oint sourc e, and it is s till p ossible to tell tha t there are tw o light sourc es
rather than one . If the y are closer tog ether , as in Figure 4.17 (c), w e cannot dis tinguish them , thus limiting the
detail or resolut ion we can obtain . This limit is an inesc apable c onse quenc e of the w ave na ture o f light .
Diffraction limits the resolution in man y situa tions . The acuity o f our vision is limite d because light p asses
through the pupil , which is the circular ap erture o f the e ye. Be a ware tha t the diffraction-lik e spre ading o f light
is due to the limite d diameter o f a light b eam, not the interaction with an ap erture . Thus , light p assing through
a lens with a diameter Dshows this eff ect and spre ads, blurring the ima ge, jus t as light p assing through an
aperture o f diameter Ddoes. Thus , diffraction limits the resolution o f an y system ha ving a lens or mirror .
Telesc opes are also limite d by diffraction , because o f the finite diameter Dof the primar y mirror .
Just wha t is the limit? T o ans wer tha t ques tion , consider the diffraction p attern f or a circular ap erture , which
has a c entral maximum tha t is wider and brighter than the maxima surrounding it (similar to a slit) ( Figure
4.18 (a)). It c an b e sho wn tha t, for a circular ap erture o f diameter D, the firs t minimum in the diffraction p attern
occurs a t (pro viding the ap erture is larg e comp ared with the w avelength o f light , which is the c ase
for mos t optic al ins truments). The ac cepte d criterion f or determining the diffract ion limit to resolution b ased
on this angle is kno wn as the Rayleigh criterion , which w as dev elop ed by Lord Ra yleigh in the nineteenth
centur y.
The firs t minimum is a t an angle o f , so tha t two point objects are jus t resolv able if the y are
separated by the angle
where is the w avelength o f light (or other electroma gnetic radia tion) and Dis the diameter o f the ap erture ,
lens , mirror , etc ., with which the tw o objects are obser ved. In this e xpres sion ,has units o f radians . This angle
is also c ommonly kno wn as the diffraction limit .Rayleigh Criterion
The diffraction limit to resolution s tates tha t two ima ges are jus t resolv able when the c enter o f the
diffraction p attern o f one is directly o ver the firs t minimum o f the diffraction p attern o f the other ( Figure
4.18 (b)).
4.54.5 • Cir cular Aper tures and Resolution 159

Figur e4.18 (a) Gr aph o f intensity o f the diffr action pat tern f or a cir cular aper ture. Not e that, similar t o a single slit, the c entr al maximum
is wider and bright er than those t o the sides . (b) T wo point objects pr oduc e overlapping diffr action pat terns . Sho wn her e is the R ayleigh
criterion f or being jus t resol vable . The c entr al maximum o f one pat tern lies on the firs t minimum o f the other .
All attempts to obser ve the siz e and shap e of objects are limite d by the w avelength o f the prob e. Even the small
wavelength o f light prohibits e xact precision . When e xtremely small w avelength prob es are use d, as with an
electron microsc ope, the s ystem is dis turb ed, still limiting our kno wledge. Heisenb erg’s unc ertainty principle
asserts tha t this limit is fundamental and inesc apable, as w e shall see in the chapter on quantum mechanics .
EXAMPLE 4.6
Calcula ting Dif fraction Limits o f the Hubble Spac e Telesc ope
The primar y mirror o f the orbiting Hubble S pace Telesc opehas a diameter o f 2.40 m . Being in orbit , this
telesc ope avoids the degrading eff ects o f atmospheric dis tortion on its resolution . (a) Wha t is the angle
between tw o jus t-resolv able p oint light sourc es (p erhaps tw o stars)? As sume an a verage light w avelength o f
550 nm . (b) If these tw o stars are a t a dis tanc e of 2 million light -years, which is the dis tanc e of the Androme da
Galaxy , how close tog ether c an the y be and s till b e resolv ed? (A light -year, or ly , is the dis tanc e light tra vels in 1
year.)
Strategy
The Ra yleigh criterion s tated in Equa tion 4.5 , , giv es the smalles t possible angle between p oint
sourc es, or the b est obtaina ble resolution . Onc e this angle is kno wn, we can c alcula te the dis tanc e between the
stars , sinc e we are giv en ho w far a way the y are .
Solution
a.The Ra yleigh criterion f or the minimum resolv able angle is
Entering kno wn v alues giv es
b.The dis tanc esbetween tw o objects a dis tanc eraway and sep arated by an angle is
Subs tituting kno wn v alues giv es160 4 • Dif fraction
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Significanc e
The angle f ound in p art (a) is e xtraordinarily small ( less than 1/50,000 o f a degree), b ecause the primar y
mirror is so larg e comp ared with the w avelength o f light . As notic ed, diffraction eff ects are mos t notic eable
when light interacts with objects ha ving siz es on the order o f the w avelength o f light . Ho wever, the eff ect is s till
there , and there is a diffraction limit to wha t is obser vable. The actual resolution o f the Hubble T elesc ope is not
quite as g ood as tha t found here . As with all ins truments , there are other eff ects , such as nonunif ormities in
mirrors or a berra tions in lenses tha t fur ther limit resolution . Ho wever,Figure 4.19 gives an indic ation o f the
extent o f the detail obser vable with the Hubble b ecause o f its siz e and quality , and esp ecially b ecause it is
above Ear th’s atmosphere .
Figur e4.19 These tw o phot ographs o f the M82 Galaxy giv e an idea o f the obser vable detail using (a) a gr ound-based t elesc ope and (b)
the Hubble Spac e Telesc ope. (credit a: modification o f work b y “Ricnun ”/Wikimedia Commons; cr edit b: modification o f work b y NASA ,
ESA , and The Hubble Heritag e Team (S TScI/A URA))
The ans wer in p art (b) indic ates tha t two stars sep arated by about half a light -year can b e resolv ed. The
average dis tanc e between s tars in a g alaxy is on the order o f five light -years in the outer p arts and a bout one
light -year ne ar the g alactic c enter . Theref ore, the Hubble c an resolv e mos t of the individual s tars in
Androme da G alaxy , even though it lies a t such a hug e dis tanc e tha t its light tak es 2 million y ears to re ach us .
Figure 4.20 shows another mirror use d to obser ve radio w aves from outer sp ace.
Figur e4.20 A 305-m-diamet er par aboloid at Ar ecibo in Puer to Ric o is lined with r eflectiv e mat erial , making it int o a r adio t elesc ope. It is
the lar gest cur ved focusing dish in the w orld. Al though Dfor Ar ecibo is much lar ger than f or the Hubble T elesc ope, it det ects r adiation o f a
much long er w avelength and its diffr action limit is significantl y poor er than Hubble ’s. The Ar ecibo t elesc ope is s till very useful , because
impor tant inf ormation is carried b y radio w aves that is not carried b y visible light. (cr edit: Jeff Hit chcock)
CHE CK Y OUR UNDER STANDING 4.5
Wha t is the angular resolution o f the Arecib o telesc ope sho wn in Figure 4.20 when op erated at 21- cm
wavelength? Ho w do es it c omp are to the resolution o f the Hubble T elesc ope?4.5 • Cir cular Aper tures and Resolution 161

Diffraction is not only a problem f or optic al ins truments but also f or the electroma gnetic radia tion itself. An y
beam o f light ha ving a finite diameter Dand a w avelength exhibits diffraction spre ading . The b eam spre ads
out with an angle given b yEqua tion 4.5 , . Take, for e xample , a laser b eam made o f rays as
parallel as p ossible (angles b etween ra ys as close to as p ossible) ins tead spre ads out a t an angle
, where Dis the diameter o f the b eam and is its w avelength . This spre ading is imp ossible to
obser ve for a flashlight b ecause its b eam is not v ery parallel to s tart with . Ho wever, for long-dis tanc e
transmis sion o f laser b eams or micro wave signals , diffraction spre ading c an b e signific ant ( Figure 4.21 ). To
avoid this , we can incre ase D. This is done f or laser light sent to the mo on to me asure its dis tanc e from Ear th.
The laser b eam is e xpande d through a telesc ope to mak eDmuch larg er and smaller .
Figur e4.21 The beam pr oduc ed b y this micr owave transmis sion ant enna spr eads out at a minimum angle due t o
diffr action. It is impos sible t o produc e a near -par allel beam because the beam has a limit ed diamet er.
In mos t biolog y laboratories , resolution is an is sue when the use o f the microsc ope is intro duced. The smaller
the dis tanc exby which tw o objects c an b e sep arated and s till b e seen as dis tinct , the gre ater the resolution .
The resolving p ower o f a lens is define d as tha t dis tanc ex. An e xpres sion f or resolving p ower is obtaine d from
the Ra yleigh criterion .Figure 4.22 (a) sho ws tw o point objects sep arated by a dis tanc ex. According to the
Rayleigh criterion , resolution is p ossible when the minimum angular sep aration is
where dis the dis tanc e between the sp ecimen and the objectiv e lens , and w e ha ve use d the small angle
appro xima tion (i .e., we ha ve as sume d tha txis much smaller than d), so tha t Theref ore, the
resolving p ower is
Another w ay to lo ok a t this is b y the c oncept o f numeric al ap erture ( NA), which is a me asure o f the maximum
acceptanc e angle a t which a lens will tak e light and s till c ontain it within the lens .Figure 4.22 (b) sho ws a lens
and an object a t point P. The NAhere is a me asure o f the a bility o f the lens to g ather light and resolv e fine
detail . The angle subtende d by the lens a t its f ocus is define d to b e . From the figure and a gain using the
small angle appro xima tion , we can write
The NAfor a lens is , where nis the inde x of refraction o f the me dium b etween the objectiv e lens
and the object a t point P. From this definition f orNA, we can see tha t
In a microsc ope,NAis imp ortant b ecause it rela tes to the resolving p ower o f a lens . A lens with a larg eNAis
able to resolv e finer details . Lenses with larg erNAare also a ble to c ollect more light and so giv e a brighter162 4 • Dif fraction
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

ima ge. Another w ay to describ e this situa tion is tha t the larg er the NA, the larg er the c one o f light tha t can b e
brought into the lens , so more o f the diffraction mo des are c ollecte d. Thus the microsc ope has more
informa tion to f orm a cle ar ima ge, and its resolving p ower is higher .
Figur e4.22 (a) T wo points separ ated b y a dis tanc exand positioned a dis tanc edaway from the objectiv e. (b) T erms and s ymbols used in
discus sion o f resol ving po wer for a lens and an object at point P(credit a: modification o f work b y “Inf opro”/Wikimedia Commons).
One o f the c onse quenc es o f diffraction is tha t the f ocal point o f a b eam has a finite width and intensity
distribution . Ima gine f ocusing when only c onsidering g eometric optics , as in Figure 4.23 (a). The f ocal point is
regarde d as an infinitely small p oint with a hug e intensity and the c apacity to incinera te mos t samples ,
irresp ectiv e of the NAof the objectiv e lens —an unph ysical oversimplific ation . For w ave optics , due to
diffraction , we tak e into ac count the phenomenon in which the f ocal point spre ads to b ecome a f ocal sp ot
(Figure 4.23 (b)) with the siz e of the sp ot decre asing with incre asing NA. Conse quently , the intensity in the f ocal
spot incre ases with incre asing NA. The higher the NA, the gre ater the chanc es o f photo degrading the
specimen . Ho wever, the sp ot nev er b ecomes a tr ue p oint .
Figur e4.23 (a) In g eometric op tics, the f ocus is model led as a point, but it is not ph ysical ly pos sible t o produc e such a point because it
implies infinit e int ensity . (b) In w ave op tics, the f ocus is an e xtended r egion.
In a diff erent typ e of microsc ope, molecules within a sp ecimen are made to emit light through a mechanism
called fluoresc ence. By controlling the molecules emit ting light , it has b ecome p ossible to c onstruct ima ges
with resolution much finer than the Ra yleigh criterion , thus circum venting the diffraction limit . The
development o f sup er-resolv ed fluoresc ence microsc opy led to the 2014 N obel Prize in Chemis try.
INTER ACTIVE
In this Optic al Resolution Mo del, two diffraction p atterns f or light through tw o circular ap ertures are sho wn4.5 • Cir cular Aper tures and Resolution 163

side b y side in this simula tion (https:/ /openstax.org/l/21optresmo dsim) by Fu-Kwun Hw ang . Watch the
patterns merg e as y ou decre ase the ap erture diameters .
4.6X-Ray Dif fraction
Learning Objectiv es
By the end o f this section, y ou wil l be able t o:
•Describe inter ference and dif fraction e ffects exhibited b y X-rays in inter action with atomic-scale s tructures
Sinc e X-ray photons are v ery energ etic, the y ha ve rela tively shor t wavelengths , on the order o f m to
m. Thus , typic al X-ray photons act lik e ra ys when the y enc ounter macrosc opic objects , like teeth , and pro duce
sharp shado ws. Ho wever, sinc e atoms are on the order o f 0.1 nm in siz e, X-rays can b e use d to detect the
location , shap e, and siz e of atoms and molecules . The pro cess is c alledX-ray diffract ion, and it in volves the
inter ferenc e of X-rays to pro duce patterns tha t can b e analyz ed for inf orma tion a bout the s tructures tha t
scattere d the X -rays.
Perhaps the mos t famous e xample o f X-ray diffraction is the disc overy of the double -helic al structure o fDNA
in 1953 b y an interna tional te am o f scientis ts w orking a t England ’s Cavendish La boratory—Americ an J ames
Watson , Englishman F rancis C rick , and N ew Z ealand-b orn Ma uric e Wilkins . Using X -ray diffraction da ta
produced by Rosalind F ranklin , the y were the firs t to mo del the double -helix s tructure o f DN A tha t is so cr ucial
to lif e. For this w ork, Watson , Crick , and W ilkins w ere a warde d the 1962 N obel Prize in Ph ysiolog y or Me dicine .
(There is some deb ate and c ontro versy over the is sue tha t Rosalind F ranklin w as not include d in the priz e,
although she die d in 1958, b efore the priz e was a warde d.)
Figure 4.24 shows a diffraction p attern pro duced by the sc attering o f X-rays from a cr ystal. This pro cess is
kno wn as X -ray cr ystallograph y because o f the inf orma tion it c an yield a bout cr ystal s tructure , and it w as the
type of data R osalind F ranklin supplie d to W atson and C rick f or DN A. Not only do X -rays confirm the siz e and
shap e of atoms , the y giv e inf orma tion a bout the a tomic arrang ements in ma terials . For e xample , more rec ent
rese arch in high-temp erature sup erconductors in volves c omple x ma terials whose la ttice arrang ements are
crucial to obtaining a sup erconducting ma terial . These c an b e studie d using X -ray cr ystallograph y.
Figur e4.24 X-ray diffr action fr om the cr ystal o f a pr otein (hen eg g lysozyme) pr oduc ed this int erference pat tern. Anal ysis o f the pat tern
yields inf ormation about the s tructur e of the pr otein. (cr edit: “Del45”/ Wikimedia Commons)
Historic ally, the sc attering o f X-rays from cr ystals w as use d to pro ve tha t X-rays are energ etic electroma gnetic
(EM) w aves. This w as susp ecte d from the time o f the disc overy of X-rays in 1895, but it w as not until 1912 tha t164 4 • Dif fraction
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

the German Max von La ue(1879–1960) c onvinc ed tw o of his c olleagues to sc atter X -rays from cr ystals. If a
diffraction p attern is obtaine d, he re asone d, then the X -rays mus t be waves, and their w avelength c ould b e
determine d. (The sp acing o f atoms in v arious cr ystals w as re asona bly w ell kno wn a t the time , based on g ood
values f or A vogadro ’s numb er.) The e xperiments w ere c onvincing , and the 1914 N obel Prize in Ph ysics w as
given to v on La ue for his sugg estion le ading to the pro of tha t X-rays are EM w aves. In 1915, the unique fa ther -
and-son te am o f Sir W illiam Henr yBraggand his son Sir W illiam La wrenc e Bra gg w ere a warde d a joint N obel
Prize for in venting the X -ray sp ectrometer and the then-new scienc e of X-ray analy sis.
In w ays reminisc ent o f thin-film inter ferenc e, we consider tw o plane w aves a t X-ray wavelengths , each one
reflecting o ff a diff erent plane o f atoms within a cr ystal’s lattice, as sho wn in Figure 4.25 . From the g eometr y,
the diff erenc e in p ath lengths is . Constructiv e inter ferenc e results when this dis tanc e is an integ er
multiple o f the w avelength . This c ondition is c apture d by the Bragg e qua tion ,
where mis a p ositiv e integ er and dis the sp acing b etween the planes . Following the La w of Reflection , both the
incident and reflecte d waves are describ ed by the same angle ,but unlik e the g eneral practic e in g eometric
optics ,is me asure d with resp ect to the sur face itself, ra ther than the normal .
Figur e4.25 X-ray diffr action with a cr ystal. Two incident w aves reflect o ff tw o planes o f a cr ystal. The diff erence in path lengths is
indicat ed b y the dashed line .
EXAMPLE 4.7
X-Ray Dif fraction with Sal t Crystals
Common ta ble salt is c omp osed mainly o f NaCl cr ystals. In a N aCl cr ystal, there is a family o f planes 0.252 nm
apart. If the firs t-order maximum is obser ved at an incidenc e angle o f , wha t is the w avelength o f the X -
ray sc attering from this cr ystal?
Strategy
Use the Bra gg e qua tion ,Equa tion 4.6 , , to solv e for .
Solution
For firs t-order , and the plane sp acing dis kno wn. Solving the Bra gg e qua tion f or w avelength yields
Significanc e
The determine d wavelength fits within the X -ray region o f the electroma gnetic sp ectr um. Onc e again, the w ave
nature o f light mak es itself prominent when the w avelength is comp arable to the siz e of the
physical structures it interacts with .
CHE CK Y OUR UNDER STANDING 4.64.64.6 • X -Ray Dif fraction 165

For the e xperiment describ ed in Example 4.7 , wha t are the tw o other angles where inter ferenc e maxima ma y
be obser ved? Wha t limits the numb er o f maxima?
Although Figure 4.25 depicts a cr ystal as a tw o-dimensional arra y of scattering c enters f or simplicity , real
crystals are s tructures in three dimensions . Scattering c an o ccur simultaneously from diff erent families o f
planes a t diff erent orienta tions and sp acing p atterns kno wn as c alledBra gg planes , as sho wn in Figure 4.26 .
The resulting inter ferenc e pattern c an b e quite c omple x.
Figur e4.26 Because o f the r egularity that mak es a cr ystal s tructur e, one cr ystal can ha ve man y families o f planes within its g eometr y,
each one giving rise t o X-ray diffr action.
4.7Hologr aphy
Learning Objectiv es
By the end o f this section, y ou wil l be able t o:
•Describe ho w a thr ee-dimensional image is r ecor ded as a hologr am
•Describe ho w a thr ee-dimensional image is f ormed fr om a hologr am
Ahologram , such as the one in Figure 4.27 , is a tr ue three -dimensional ima ge rec orde d on film b y lasers .
Holograms are use d for amusement; dec oration on no velty items and ma gazine c overs; security on cre dit
cards and driv er’s lic enses (a laser and other e quipment are nee ded to repro duce them); and f or serious three -
dimensional inf orma tion s tora ge. You c an see tha t a hologram is a tr ue three -dimensional ima ge because
objects chang e rela tive position in the ima ge when view ed from diff erent angles .
Figur e4.27 Credit car ds c ommonl y ha ve hologr ams f or log os, making them difficul t to reproduc e. (credit: Dominic Al ves)
The name hologram me ans “ entire picture ” (from the Greek holo , as in holis tic) b ecause the ima ge is three -
dimensional .Holograph yis the pro cess of pro ducing holograms and , although the y are rec orde d on
photographic film , the pro cess is quite diff erent from normal photograph y. Holograph y uses light inter ferenc e
or w ave optics , where as normal photograph y uses g eometric optics .Figure 4.28 shows one metho d of
producing a hologram . Coherent light from a laser is split b y a mirror , with p art of the light illumina ting the
object . The remainder , called the ref erenc e beam, shines directly on a piec e of film . Light sc attere d from the166 4 • Dif fraction
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

object inter feres with the ref erenc e beam, pro ducing c onstructiv e and des tructiv e inter ferenc e. As a result , the
exposed film lo oks f oggy, but close e xamina tion rev eals a c omplic ated inter ferenc e pattern s tore d on it . Where
the inter ferenc e was c onstructiv e, the film (a neg ative actually ) is dark ened. Holograph y is sometimes c alled
lens -less photograph y, because it uses the w ave characteris tics o f light , as c ontras ted to normal photograph y,
which uses g eometric optics and re quires lenses .
Figur e4.28 Production o f a hologr am. Single -wavelength c oher ent light fr om a laser pr oduc es a w ell-defined int erference pat tern on a
piec e of film. The laser beam is split b y a par tially silvered mirr or, with par t of the light il luminating the object and the r emainder shining
directly on the film. (cr edit: modification o f work b y Mariana Ruiz Vil larreal)
Light falling on a hologram c an f orm a three -dimensional ima ge of the original object . The pro cess is
complic ated in detail , but the b asics c an b e unders tood, as sho wn in Figure 4.29 , in which a laser o f the same
type tha t exposed the film is no w use d to illumina te it . The m yriad tin y exposed regions o f the film are dark
and blo ck the light , where as les s exposed regions allo w light to p ass. The film thus acts much lik e a c ollection
of diffraction gra tings with v arious sp acing p atterns . Light p assing through the hologram is diffracte d in
various directions , pro ducing b oth re al and vir tual ima ges o f the object use d to e xpose the film . The
inter ferenc e pattern is the same as tha t pro duced by the object . Mo ving y our e ye to v arious plac es in the
inter ferenc e pattern giv es y ou diff erent p ersp ectiv es, jus t as lo oking directly a t the object w ould . The ima ge
thus lo oks lik e the object and is three dimensional lik e the object .
Figur e4.29 A transmis sion hologr am is one that pr oduc es real and vir tual imag es when a laser o f the same type as that which e xposed
the hologr am is pas sed thr ough it. Diffr action fr om v arious par ts of the film pr oduc es the same int erference pat tern that w as pr oduc ed b y
the object that w as used t o expose it. (cr edit: modification o f work b y Mariana Ruiz Vil larreal)
The hologram illus trated in Figure 4.29 is a transmis sion hologram . Holograms tha t are view ed with reflecte d
light , such as the white light holograms on cre dit c ards , are reflection holograms and are more c ommon . White
light holograms o ften app ear a lit tle blurr y with rainb ow edges, because the diffraction p atterns o f various
colors o f light are a t slightly diff erent lo cations due to their diff erent w avelengths . Further uses o fholograph y
include all typ es o f three -dimensional inf orma tion s tora ge, such as o f statues in museums , engineering
studies o f structures , and ima ges o f human org ans.4.7 • Hologr aphy 167

Invente d in the la te 1940s b y Dennis Gabor(1900–1970), who w on the 1971 N obel Prize in Ph ysics f or his
work, holograph y became far more practic al with the dev elopment o f the laser . Sinc e lasers pro duce coherent
single -wavelength light , their inter ferenc e patterns are more pronounc ed. The precision is so gre at tha t it is
even p ossible to rec ord numerous holograms on a single piec e of film b y jus t changing the angle o f the film f or
each suc cessive ima ge. This is ho w the holograms tha t mo ve as y ou w alk b y them are pro duced—a kind o f lens -
less mo vie.
In a similar w ay, in the me dical field , holograms ha ve allo wed complete three -dimensional holographic
displa ys of objects from a s tack o f ima ges. Storing these ima ges for future use is rela tively e asy. With the use o f
an endosc ope, high-resolution , three -dimensional holographic ima ges o f internal org ans and tis sues c an b e
made .168 4 • Dif fraction
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

CHAP TER RE VIEW
Key Terms
Bra gg planes families o f planes within cr ystals
that can giv e rise to X -ray diffraction
destructive inter ferenc e for a single slit occurs
when the width o f the slit is c omp arable to the
wavelength o f light illumina ting it
diffract ion bending o f a w ave around the e dges o f
an op ening or an obs tacle
diffract ion grat ing larg e numb er o f evenly sp aced
parallel slits
diffract ion limit fundamental limit to resolution
due to diffraction
hologram three -dimensional ima ge rec orde d on
film b y lasers; the w ord hologram me ans entire
picture (from the Greek w ord holo , as in holis tic)
holograph yprocess of pro ducing holograms with
the use o f lasers
mis sing order inter ferenc e maximum tha t is not
seen b ecause it c oincides with a diffractionminimum
Rayleigh criterion two ima ges are jus t-resolv able
when the c enter o f the diffraction p attern o f one
is directly o ver the firs t minimum o f the
diffraction p attern o f the other
resolut ion ability , or limit thereo f, to dis tinguish
small details in ima ges
two-slit diffract ion p attern diffraction p attern o f
two slits o f width Dthat are sep arated by a
distanc edis the inter ferenc e pattern o f two point
sourc es sep arated bydmultiplie d by the
diffraction p attern o f a slit o f width D
width of the c entral p eak angle b etween the
minimum f or and
X-ray diffract ion technique tha t pro vides the
detaile d inf orma tion a bout cr ystallographic
structure o f na tural and manufacture d ma terials
Key Equations
Destructiv e inter ferenc e for a single slit
Half phase angle
Field amplitude in the diffraction p attern
Intensity in the diffraction p attern
Rayleigh criterion f or circular ap ertures
Bragg e qua tion
Summar y
4.1Single -Slit Dif fraction
•Diffraction c an send a w ave around the e dges o f
an op ening or other obs tacle .
•A single slit pro duces an inter ferenc e pattern
characteriz ed by a bro ad c entral maximum with
narro wer and dimmer maxima to the sides .
4.2Intensit y in Single -Slit Dif fraction
•The intensity p attern f or diffraction due to a
single slit c an b e calcula ted using phasors aswhere ,ais the slit width ,is
the w avelength , and is the angle from the
central p eak.
4.3Double -Slit Dif fraction
•With re al slits with finite widths , the eff ects o f
inter ferenc e and diffraction op erate
simultaneously to f orm a c omplic ated intensity4 • Chap ter Re view 169

pattern .
•Relative intensities o f inter ferenc e fring es
within a diffraction p attern c an b e determine d.
•Missing orders o ccur when an inter ferenc e
maximum and a diffraction minimum are
located tog ether .
4.4Diffraction Gr atings
•A diffraction gra ting c onsis ts of a larg e numb er
of evenly sp aced parallel slits tha t pro duce an
inter ferenc e pattern similar to but sharp er than
that of a double slit .
•Constructiv e inter ferenc e occurs when
where dis
the dis tanc e between the slits ,is the angle
rela tive to the incident direction , and mis the
order o f the inter ferenc e.
4.5Circular Aper tures and Resolution
•Diffraction limits resolution .•The Ra yleigh criterion s tates tha t two ima ges
are jus t resolv able when the c enter o f the
diffraction p attern o f one is directly o ver the
first minimum o f the diffraction p attern o f the
other .
4.6X-Ray Dif fraction
•X-rays are rela tively shor t-wavelength EM
radia tion and c an e xhibit w ave characteris tics
such as inter ferenc e when interacting with
corresp ondingly small objects .
4.7Hologr aphy
•Holograph y is a technique b ased on w ave
inter ferenc e to rec ord and f orm three -
dimensional ima ges.
•Lasers o ffer a practic al w ay to pro duce sharp
holographic ima ges b ecause o f their
mono chroma tic and c oherent light f or
pronounc ed inter ferenc e patterns .
Concep tual Ques tions
4.1Single -Slit Dif fraction
1.As the width o f the slit pro ducing a single -slit
diffraction p attern is re duced, how will the
diffraction p attern pro duced chang e?
2.Comp are inter ferenc e and diffraction .
3.If you and a friend are on opp osite sides o f a hill ,
you c an c ommunic ate with w alkie -talkies but not
with flashlights . Explain .
4.Wha t happ ens to the diffraction p attern o f a
single slit when the entire optic al app aratus is
immerse d in w ater?
5.In our s tudy o f diffraction b y a single slit , we
assume tha t the length o f the slit is much larg er
than the width . Wha t happ ens to the diffraction
pattern if these tw o dimensions w ere
comp arable?
6.A rectangular slit is twic e as wide as it is high . Is
the c entral diffraction p eak wider in the v ertical
direction or in the horiz ontal direction?
4.2Intensit y in Single -Slit Dif fraction
7.InEqua tion 4.4 , the p arameter looks lik e an
angle but is not an angle tha t you c an me asure
with a protractor in the ph ysical w orld . Explain
wha trepresents .
4.3Double -Slit Dif fraction
8.Sho wn b elow is the c entral p art of the inter ferenc e
pattern f or a pure w avelength o f red light projecte donto a double slit . The p attern is actually a
combina tion o f single - and double -slit inter ferenc e.
Note tha t the bright sp ots are ev enly sp aced. Is this a
double - or single -slit characteris tic? N ote tha t some
of the bright sp ots are dim on either side o f the
center . Is this a single - or double -slit characteris tic?
Which is smaller , the slit width or the sep aration
between slits? Explain y our resp onses .
(cre dit: P ASC O)
4.5Circular Aper tures and Resolution
9.Is higher resolution obtaine d in a microsc ope
with re d or blue light? Explain y our ans wer.
10.The resolving p ower o f refracting telesc ope
incre ases with the siz e of its objectiv e lens .
Wha t other adv anta ge is g aine d with a larg er
lens?
11.The dis tanc e between a toms in a molecule is
about . Can visible light b e use d to
“see” molecules?
12.A beam o f light alw ays spre ads out . Wh y can a
beam not b e cre ated with p arallel ra ys to
prev ent spre ading? Wh y can lenses , mirrors , or
apertures not b e use d to c orrect the spre ading?170 4 • Chap ter Re view
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

4.6X-Ray Dif fraction
13.Crystal la ttices c an b e examine d with X -rays but
not UV . Wh y?
4.7Hologr aphy
14.How can y ou tell tha t a hologram is a tr ue three -
dimensional ima ge and tha t those in three -
dimensional mo vies are not?15.If a hologram is rec orde d using mono chroma tic
light a t one w avelength but its ima ge is view ed
at another w avelength , say shor ter, wha t
will y ou see? Wha t if it is view ed using light o f
exactly half the original w avelength?
16.Wha t ima ge will one see if a hologram is
recorde d using mono chroma tic light but its
ima ge is view ed in white light? Explain .
Problems
4.1Single -Slit Dif fraction
17.(a) A t wha t angle is the firs t minimum f or
550-nm light falling on a single slit o f width
? (b) W ill there b e a sec ond minimum?
18.(a) C alcula te the angle a t which a -wide
slit pro duces its firs t minimum f or 410-nm
violet light . (b) Where is the firs t minimum f or
700-nm re d light?
19.(a) Ho w wide is a single slit tha t pro duces its
first minimum f or 633-nm light a t an angle o f
? (b) A t wha t angle will the sec ond
minimum b e?
20.(a) Wha t is the width o f a single slit tha t
produces its firs t minimum a t for 600-nm
light? ( b) F ind the w avelength o f light tha t has
its firs t minimum a t .
21.Find the w avelength o f light tha t has its third
minimum a t an angle o f when it falls on a
single slit o f width .
22.(a) So dium v apor light a veraging 589 nm in
wavelength falls on a single slit o f width
. At wha t angle do es it pro duces its
second minimum? ( b) Wha t is the highes t-order
minimum pro duced?
23.Consider a single -slit diffraction p attern f or
, projecte d on a screen tha t is 1.00
m from a slit o f width 0.25 mm . Ho w far from
the c enter o f the p attern are the c enters o f the
first and sec ond dark fring es?
24.(a) F ind the angle b etween the firs t minima f or
the tw o so dium v apor lines , which ha ve
wavelengths o f 589.1 and 589.6 nm , when the y
fall up on a single slit o f width . (b) Wha t
is the dis tanc e between these minima if the
diffraction p attern falls on a screen 1.00 m from
the slit? (c) Discus s the e ase or difficulty o f
measuring such a dis tanc e.
25.(a) Wha t is the minimum width o f a single slit
(in multiples o f) tha t will pro duce a firs t
minimum f or a w avelength ? (b) Wha t is its
minimum width if it pro duces 50 minima? (c)1000 minima?
26.(a) If a single slit pro duces a firs t minimum a t
at wha t angle is the sec ond-order
minimum? ( b) Wha t is the angle o f the third-
order minimum? (c) Is there a f ourth-order
minimum? (d) U se y our ans wers to illus trate
how the angular width o f the c entral maximum
is about twic e the angular width o f the ne xt
maximum ( which is the angle b etween the firs t
and sec ond minima).
27.If the sep aration b etween the firs t and the
second minima o f a single -slit diffraction
pattern is 6.0 mm , wha t is the dis tanc e between
the screen and the slit? The light w avelength is
500 nm and the slit width is 0.16 mm .
28.A water bre ak a t the entranc e to a harb or
consis ts of a ro ck b arrier with a 50.0-m-wide
opening . Ocean w aves o f 20.0-m w avelength
appro ach the op ening s traight on . At wha t
angles to the incident direction are the b oats
inside the harb or mos t protecte d agains t wave
action?
29.An aircra ft maintenanc e technician w alks p ast a
tall hang ar do or tha t acts lik e a single slit f or
sound entering the hang ar. Outside the do or, on
a line p erpendicular to the op ening in the do or,
a jet engine mak es a 600-Hz sound . At wha t
angle with the do or will the technician obser ve
the firs t minimum in sound intensity if the
vertical op ening is 0.800 m wide and the sp eed
of sound is 340 m/s?
4.2Intensit y in Single -Slit Dif fraction
30.A single slit o f width is illumina ted by a
sodium y ellow light o f wavelength 589 nm . Find
the intensity a t a angle to the axis in terms
of the intensity o f the c entral maximum .
31.A single slit o f width 0.1 mm is illumina ted by a
mercur y light o f wavelength 576 nm . Find the
intensity a t a angle to the axis in terms o f
the intensity o f the c entral maximum .4 • Chap ter Re view 171

32.The width o f the c entral p eak in a single -slit
diffraction p attern is 5.0 mm . The w avelength o f
the light is 600 nm , and the screen is 2.0 m from
the slit . (a) Wha t is the width o f the slit? ( b)
Determine the ra tio o f the intensity a t 4.5 mm
from the c enter o f the p attern to the intensity a t
the c enter .
33.Consider the single -slit diffraction p attern f or
, , and . Find
the intensity in terms o f at , ,
, , and .
4.3Double -Slit Dif fraction
34.Two slits o f width each in an op aque
material , are sep arated by a c enter -to-center
distanc e of A mono chroma tic light o f
wavelength 450 nm is incident on the double -
slit. One finds a c ombine d inter ferenc e and
diffraction p attern on the screen .
(a) Ho w man y peaks o f the inter ferenc e will b e
obser ved in the c entral maximum o f the
diffraction p attern?
(b) Ho w man y peaks o f the inter ferenc e will b e
obser ved if the slit width is double d while
keeping the dis tanc e between the slits same?
(c) Ho w man y peaks o f inter ferenc e will b e
obser ved if the slits are sep arated by twic e the
distanc e, tha t is, while k eeping the
widths o f the slits same?
(d) Wha t will happ en in (a) if ins tead o f 450-nm
light another light o f wavelength 680 nm is
used?
(e) Wha t is the v alue o f the ra tio o f the intensity
of the c entral p eak to the intensity o f the ne xt
bright p eak in (a)?
(f) Do es this ra tio dep end on the w avelength o f
the light?
(g) Do es this ra tio dep end on the width or
separation o f the slits?
35.A double slit pro duces a diffraction p attern tha t
is a c ombina tion o f single - and double -slit
inter ferenc e. Find the ra tio o f the width o f the
slits to the sep aration b etween them , if the firs t
minimum o f the single -slit p attern falls on the
fifth maximum o f the double -slit p attern . (This
will gre atly re duce the intensity o f the fifth
maximum .)
36.For a double -slit c onfigura tion where the slit
separation is f our times the slit width , how
man y inter ferenc e fring es lie in the c entral p eak
of the diffraction p attern?
37.Light o f wavelength 500 nm falls normally on 50
slits tha t are wide and sp acedapart. Ho w man y inter ferenc e
fring es lie in the c entral p eak o f the diffraction
pattern?
38.A mono chroma tic light o f wavelength 589 nm
incident on a double slit with slit width
and unkno wn sep aration results in a diffraction
pattern c ontaining nine inter ferenc e peaks
inside the c entral maximum . Find the
separation o f the slits .
39.When a mono chroma tic light o f wavelength 430
nm incident on a double slit o f slit sep aration
, there are 11 inter ferenc e fring es in its
central maximum . Ho w man y inter ferenc e
fring es will b e in the c entral maximum o f a light
of the same w avelength and slit widths , but a
new slit sep aration o f ?
40.Determine the intensities o f two inter ferenc e
peaks other than the c entral p eak in the c entral
maximum o f the diffraction , if p ossible , when a
light o f wavelength 628 nm is incident on a
double slit o f width 500 nm and sep aration
1500 nm . Use the intensity o f the c entral sp ot to
be .
4.4Diffraction Gr atings
41.A diffraction gra ting has 2000 lines p er
centimeter . At wha t angle will the firs t-order
maximum b e for 520-nm-w avelength green
light?
42.Find the angle f or the third-order maximum f or
580-nm-w avelength y ellow light falling on a
difraction gra ting ha ving 1500 lines p er
centimeter .
43.How man y lines p er centimeter are there on a
diffraction gra ting tha t giv es a firs t-order
maximum f or 470-nm blue light a t an angle o f
?
44.Wha t is the dis tanc e between lines on a
diffraction gra ting tha t pro duces a sec ond-order
maximum f or 760-nm re d light a t an angle o f
?
45.Calcula te the w avelength o f light tha t has its
second-order maximum a t when falling
on a diffraction gra ting tha t has 5000 lines p er
centimeter .
46.An electric current through h ydrog en g as
produces sev eral dis tinct w avelengths o f visible
light . Wha t are the w avelengths o f the h ydrog en
spectr um, if the y form firs t-order maxima a t
angles and when
projecte d on a diffraction gra ting ha ving 10,000
lines p er centimeter?
47.(a) Wha t do the f our angles in the prec eding172 4 • Chap ter Re view
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

problem b ecome if a 5000-line p er centimeter
diffraction gra ting is use d? (b) U sing this
grating , wha t would the angles b e for the
second-order maxima? (c) Discus s the
rela tionship b etween integral re ductions in
lines p er centimeter and the new angles o f
various order maxima.
48.Wha t is the sp acing b etween s tructures in a
feather tha t acts as a reflection gra ting , giving
that the y pro duce a firs t-order maximum f or
525-nm light a t a angle?
49.An op al such as tha t sho wn in Figure 4.15 acts
like a reflection gra ting with ro ws sep arated by
about If the op al is illumina ted normally ,
(a) a t wha t angle will re d light b e seen and ( b) at
wha t angle will blue light b e seen?
50.At wha t angle do es a diffraction gra ting pro duce
a sec ond-order maximum f or light ha ving a
first-order maximum a t ?
51.(a) F ind the maximum numb er o f lines p er
centimeter a diffraction gra ting c an ha ve and
produce a maximum f or the smalles t
wavelength o f visible light . (b) W ould such a
grating b e useful f or ultra violet sp ectra? (c) F or
infrare d sp ectra?
52.(a) Sho w tha t a 30,000 line p er centimeter
grating will not pro duce a maximum f or visible
light . (b) Wha t is the long est wavelength f or
which it do es pro duce a firs t-order maximum?
(c) Wha t is the gre atest numb er o f line p er
centimeter a diffraction gra ting c an ha ve and
produce a c omplete sec ond-order sp ectr um f or
visible light?
53.The analy sis sho wn b elow also applies to diffraction
gratings with lines sep arated by a dis tanc ed. Wha t
is the dis tanc e between fring es pro duced by a
diffraction gra ting ha ving 125 lines p er centimeter
for 600-nm light , if the screen is 1.50 m a way? (Hin t:
The dis tanc e between adjac ent fring es is
assuming the slit sep aration dis comp arable to )
4.5Circular Aper tures and Resolution
54.The 305-m-diameter Arecib o radio telesc ope
picture d in Figure 4.20 detects radio w aves with
a 4.00- cm a verage wavelength . (a) Wha t is the
angle b etween tw o jus t-resolv able p oint sourc es
for this telesc ope? (b) Ho w close tog ether c ould
these p oint sourc es b e at the 2 million light -year
distanc e of the Androme da G alaxy?
55.Assuming the angular resolution f ound f or the
Hubble T elesc ope in Example 4.6 , wha t is the
smalles t detail tha t could b e obser ved on the
moon?
56.Diffraction spre ading f or a flashlight is
insignific ant c omp ared with other limita tions in
its optics , such as spheric al aberra tions in its
mirror . To sho w this , calcula te the minimum
angular spre ading o f a flashlight b eam tha t is
originally 5.00 cm in diameter with an a verage
wavelength o f 600 nm .
57.(a) Wha t is the minimum angular spre ad o f a
633-nm w avelength He -Ne laser b eam tha t is
originally 1.00 mm in diameter? ( b) If this laser
is aime d at a mountain cliff 15.0 km a way, how
big will the illumina ted sp ot b e? (c) Ho w big a
spot w ould b e illumina ted on the mo on,
neglecting a tmospheric eff ects? ( This might b e
done to hit a c orner reflector to me asure the
round-trip time and , henc e, dis tanc e.)
58.A telesc ope can b e use d to enlarg e the diameter
of a laser b eam and limit diffraction spre ading .
The laser b eam is sent through the telesc ope in
opp osite the normal direction and c an then b e
projecte d onto a sa tellite or the mo on. (a) If this
is done with the Mount W ilson telesc ope,
producing a 2.54-m-diameter b eam o f 633-nm
light , wha t is the minimum angular spre ad o f
the b eam? ( b) N eglecting a tmospheric eff ects ,
wha t is the siz e of the sp ot this b eam w ould
mak e on the mo on, assuming a lunar dis tanc e
of ?
59.The limit to the e ye’s acuity is actually rela ted to
diffraction b y the pupil . (a) Wha t is the angle
between tw o jus t-resolv able p oints o f light f or a
3.00-mm-diameter pupil , assuming an a verage
wavelength o f 550 nm? ( b) T ake your result to
be the practic al limit f or the e ye. Wha t is the
greatest possible dis tanc e a c ar can b e from y ou
if you c an resolv e its tw o he adlights , giv en the y
are 1.30 m ap art? (c) Wha t is the dis tanc e
between tw o jus t-resolv able p oints held a t an
arm ’s length (0.800 m) from y our e ye? (d) Ho w
does y our ans wer to (c) c omp are to details y ou
normally obser ve in ev eryday circums tanc es?4 • Chap ter Re view 173

60.Wha t is the minimum diameter mirror on a
telesc ope tha t would allo w you to see details as
small as 5.00 km on the mo on some 384,000
km a way? As sume an a verage wavelength o f
550 nm f or the light rec eived.
61.Find the radius o f a s tar’s ima ge on the retina o f
an e ye if its pupil is op en to 0.65 cm and the
distanc e from the pupil to the retina is 2.8 cm .
Assume .
62.(a) The dw arf planet Pluto and its mo on,
Charon , are sep arated by 19,600 km . Neglecting
atmospheric eff ects , should the 5.08-m-
diameter P alomar Mountain telesc ope be able to
resolv e these b odies when the y are
from Ear th? As sume an a verage
wavelength o f 550 nm . (b) In actuality , it is jus t
barely p ossible to disc ern tha t Pluto and Charon
are sep arate bodies using a ground-b ased
telesc ope. Wha t are the re asons f or this?
63.A sp y sa tellite orbits Ear th a t a height o f 180
km. Wha t is the minimum diameter o f the
objectiv e lens in a telesc ope tha t mus t be use d
to resolv e columns o f tro ops marching 2.0 m
apart? As sume
64.Wha t is the minimum angular sep aration o f two
stars tha t are jus t-resolv able b y the 8.1-m
Gemini South telesc ope, if a tmospheric eff ects
do not limit resolution? U se 550 nm f or the
wavelength o f the light from the s tars .
65.The he adlights o f a c ar are 1.3 m ap art. Wha t is
the maximum dis tanc e at which the e ye can
resolv e these tw o he adlights? T ake the pupil
diameter to b e 0.40 cm .
66.When dots are plac ed on a p age from a laser
printer , the y mus t be close enough so tha t you
do not see the individual dots o f ink . To do this ,
the sep aration o f the dots mus t be les s than
Raleigh ’s criterion . Take the pupil o f the e ye to
be 3.0 mm and the dis tanc e from the p aper to
the e ye of 35 cm; find the minimum sep aration
of two dots such tha t the y cannot b e resolv ed.
How man y dots p er inch (dpi) do es this
corresp ond to?
67.Supp ose y ou are lo oking do wn a t a high way
from a jetliner flying a t an altitude o f 6.0 km .
How far ap art mus t two cars b e if y ou are a ble to
distinguish them? As sume tha t and
that the diameter o f your pupils is 4.0 mm .
68.Can an as trona ut orbiting Ear th in a sa tellite a t
a dis tanc e of 180 km from the sur face
distinguish tw o sky scrap ers tha t are 20 m
apart? As sume tha t the pupils o f the as trona ut’s
eyes ha ve a diameter o f 5.0 mm and tha t mos t ofthe light is c entere d around 500 nm .
69.The characters o f a s tadium sc oreb oard are
forme d with closely sp aced lightbulbs tha t
radia te primarily y ellow light . (Use )
How closely mus t the bulbs b e sp aced so tha t an
obser ver 80 m a way sees a displa y of
continuous lines ra ther than the individual
bulbs? As sume tha t the pupil o f the obser ver’s
eye has a diameter o f 5.0 mm .
70.If a microsc ope can ac cept light from objects a t
angles as larg e as , wha t is the smalles t
structure tha t can b e resolv ed when illumina ted
with light o f wavelength 500 nm and (a) the
specimen is in air? ( b) When the sp ecimen is
immerse d in oil , with inde x of refraction o f
1.52?
71.A camera uses a lens with ap erture 2.0 cm .
Wha t is the angular resolution o f a photograph
taken a t 700 nm w avelength? C an it resolv e the
millimeter markings o f a r uler plac ed 35 m
away?
4.6X-Ray Dif fraction
72.X-rays of wavelength 0.103 nm reflects o ff a
crystal and a sec ond-order maximum is
recorde d at a Bra gg angle o f . Wha t is the
spacing b etween the sc attering planes in this
crystal?
73.A firs t-order Bra gg reflection maximum is
obser ved when a mono chroma tic X -ray falls on
a cr ystal a t a angle to a reflecting plane .
Wha t is the w avelength o f this X -ray?
74.An X -ray sc attering e xperiment is p erforme d on
a cr ystal whose a toms f orm planes sep arated by
0.440 nm . Using an X -ray sourc e of wavelength
0.548 nm , wha t is the angle ( with resp ect to the
planes in ques tion) a t which the e xperimenter
needs to illumina te the cr ystal in order to
obser ve a firs t-order maximum?
75.The s tructure o f the N aCl cr ystal f orms
reflecting planes 0.541 nm ap art. Wha t is the
smalles t angle , me asure d from these planes , at
which X -ray diffraction c an b e obser ved, if X -
rays of wavelength 0.085 nm are use d?
76.On a c ertain cr ystal, a firs t-order X -ray
diffraction maximum is obser ved at an angle o f
rela tive to its sur face, using an X -ray
sourc e of unkno wn w avelength . Additionally ,
when illumina ted with a diff erent , this time o f
kno wn w avelength 0.137 nm , a sec ond-order
maximum is detecte d at Determine (a)
the sp acing b etween the reflecting planes , and
(b) the unkno wn w avelength .174 4 • Chap ter Re view
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

77.Calcite cr ystals c ontain sc attering planes
separated by 0.30 nm . Wha t is the angular
separation b etween firs t and sec ond-order
diffraction maxima when X -rays of 0.130 nmwavelength are use d?
78.The firs t-order Bra gg angle f or a c ertain cr ystal
is . Wha t is the sec ond-order angle?
Additional P roblems
79.White light falls on tw o narro w slits sep arated
by 0.40 mm . The inter ferenc e pattern is
obser ved on a screen 3.0 m a way. (a) Wha t is the
separation b etween the firs t maxima f or re d
light and violet light
(b) A t wha t point ne ares t the
central maximum will a maximum f or y ellow
light coincide with a maximum f or
violet light? Identif y the order f or e ach
maximum .
80.Micro waves o f wavelength 10.0 mm fall
normally on a metal pla te tha t contains a slit 25
mm wide . (a) Where are the firs t minima o f the
diffraction p attern? ( b) W ould there b e minima
if the w avelength w ere 30.0 mm?
81.Quasars , orquasi-s tellar radio sourc es, are
astronomic al objects disc overed in 1960. The y
are dis tant but s trong emit ters o f radio w aves
with angular siz e so small , the y were originally
unresolv ed, the same as s tars . The quasar
3C405 is actually tw o discrete radio sourc es tha t
subtend an angle o f 82 arcsec . If this object is
studie d using radio emis sions a t a fre quency o f
410 MHz, wha t is the minimum diameter o f a
radio telesc ope tha t can resolv e the tw o
sourc es?
82.Two slits e ach o f width 1800 nm and sep arated
by the c enter -to-center dis tanc e of 1200 nm are
illumina ted by plane w aves from a kr ypton ion
laser -emit ting a t wavelength 461.9 nm . Find the
numb er o f inter ferenc e peaks in the c entral
diffraction p eak.
83.A micro wave of an unkno wn w avelength is
incident on a single slit o f width 6 cm . The
angular width o f the c entral p eak is f ound to b e
. Find the w avelength .
84.Red light ( wavelength 632.8 nm in air) from a
Helium-N eon laser is incident on a single slit o f
width 0.05 mm . The entire app aratus is
immerse d in w ater o f refractiv e inde x 1.333.
Determine the angular width o f the c entral
peak.85.A light ra y of wavelength 461.9 nm emerg es
from a 2-mm circular ap erture o f a kr ypton ion
laser . Due to diffraction , the b eam e xpands as it
moves out . Ho w larg e is the c entral bright sp ot
at (a) 1 m , (b) 1 km , (c) 1000 km , and (d) a t the
surface of the mo on a t a dis tanc e of 400,000 km
from Ear th.
86.How far ap art mus t two objects b e on the mo on
to b e dis tinguisha ble b y eye if only the
diffraction eff ects o f the e ye’s pupil limit the
resolution? As sume 550 nm f or the w avelength
of light , the pupil diameter 5.0 mm , and
400,000 km f or the dis tanc e to the mo on.
87.How far ap art mus t two objects b e on the mo on
to b e resolv able b y the 8.1-m-diameter Gemini
North telesc ope at Ma una K ea, Ha waii, if only
the diffraction eff ects o f the telesc ope ap erture
limit the resolution? As sume 550 nm f or the
wavelength o f light and 400,000 km f or the
distanc e to the mo on.
88.A sp y sa tellite is repute d to b e able to resolv e
objects 10. cm ap art while op erating 197 km
above the sur face of Ear th. Wha t is the diameter
of the ap erture o f the telesc ope if the resolution
is only limite d by the diffraction eff ects? U se
550 nm f or light .
89.Mono chroma tic light o f wavelength 530 nm
passes through a horiz ontal single slit o f width
in an op aque pla te. A screen o f
dimensions is 1.2 m a way from
the slit . (a) Which w ay is the diffraction p attern
spre ad out on the screen? ( b) Wha t are the
angles o f the minima with resp ect to the c enter?
(c) Wha t are the angles o f the maxima? (d) Ho w
wide is the c entral bright fring e on the screen?
(e) Ho w wide is the ne xt bright fring e on the
screen?
90.A mono chroma tic light o f unkno wn w avelength
is incident on a slit o f width . A diffraction
pattern is seen a t a screen 2.5 m a way where the
central maximum is spre ad o ver a dis tanc e of
10.0 cm . Find the w avelength .
91.A sourc e of light ha ving tw o wavelengths 550
nm and 600 nm o f equal intensity is incident on
a slit o f width . Find the sep aration o f the
bright sp ots o f the tw o wavelengths on a
screen 30.0 cm a way.4 • Chap ter Re view 175

92.A single slit o f width 2100 nm is illumina ted
normally b y a w ave of wavelength 632.8 nm .
Find the phase diff erenc e between w aves from
the top and one third from the b ottom o f the slit
to a p oint on a screen a t a horiz ontal dis tanc e of
2.0 m and v ertical dis tanc e of 10.0 cm from the
center .
93.A single slit o f width is illumina ted by a
sodium y ellow light o f wavelength 589 nm . Find
the intensity a t a angle to the axis in terms
of the intensity o f the c entral maximum .
94.A single slit o f width 0.10 mm is illumina ted by
a mercur y lamp o f wavelength 576 nm . Find the
intensity a t a angle to the axis in terms o f
the intensity o f the c entral maximum .
95.A diffraction gra ting pro duces a sec ond
maximum tha t is 89.7 cm from the c entral
maximum on a screen 2.0 m a way. If the gra ting
has 600 lines p er centimeter , wha t is the
wavelength o f the light tha t pro duces the
diffraction p attern?
96.A gra ting with 4000 lines p er centimeter is use d
to diffract light tha t contains all w avelengths
between 400 and 650 nm . Ho w wide is the firs t-
order sp ectr um on a screen 3.0 m from the
grating?
97.A diffraction gra ting with 2000 lines p er
centimeter is use d to me asure the w avelengths
emit ted by a h ydrog en g as discharg e tub e. (a) A t
wha t angles will y ou find the maxima o f the tw o
first-order blue lines o f wavelengths 410 and
434 nm? ( b) The maxima o f two other firs t-
order lines are f ound a t and
. Wha t are the w avelengths o f
these lines?
98.For white light falling
normally on a diffraction gra ting , sho w tha t the
second and third-order sp ectra o verlap no
matter wha t the gra ting c onstant dis.
99.How man y complete orders o f the visible
spectr um can b e
produced with a diffraction gra ting tha t
contains 5000 lines p er centimeter?
100 .Two lamps pro ducing light o f wavelength 589
nm are fix ed 1.0 m ap art on a w ooden plank .
Wha t is the maximum dis tanc e an obser ver
can b e and s till resolv e the lamps as tw o
separate sourc es o f light , if the resolution is
affecte d solely b y the diffraction o f light
entering the e ye? As sume light enters the e ye
through a pupil o f diameter 4.5 mm .101 .On a bright cle ar da y, you are a t the top o f a
mountain and lo oking a t a city 12 km a way.
There are tw o tall to wers 20.0 m ap art in the
city. Can y our e ye resolv e the tw o towers if the
diameter o f the pupil is 4.0 mm? If not , wha t
should b e the minimum ma gnific ation p ower
of the telesc ope nee ded to resolv e the tw o
towers? In y our c alcula tions use 550 nm f or
the w avelength o f the light .
102 .Radio telesc opes are telesc opes use d for the
detection o f radio emis sion from sp ace. Bec ause
radio w aves ha ve much long er w avelengths than
visible light , the diameter o f a radio telesc ope mus t
be very larg e to pro vide g ood resolution . For
example , the radio telesc ope in P enticton , BC in
Canada, has a diameter o f 26 m and c an b e op erated
at fre quencies as high as 6.6 GHz. (a) Wha t is the
wavelength c orresp onding to this fre quency? ( b)
Wha t is the angular sep aration o f two radio sourc es
that can b e resolv ed by this telesc ope? (c) C omp are
the telesc ope’s resolution with the angular siz e of the
moon.
Figur e4.30 (credit: modification o f work b y Jason Nishiy ama)
103 .Calcula te the w avelength o f light tha t pro duces
its firs t minimum a t an angle o f when
falling on a single slit o f width .
104 .(a) F ind the angle o f the third diffraction
minimum f or 633-nm light falling on a slit o f
width . (b) Wha t slit width w ould plac e
this minimum a t ?176 4 • Chap ter Re view
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

105 .As an e xample o f diffraction b y ap ertures o f
everyday dimensions , consider a do orway of
width 1.0 m . (a) Wha t is the angular p osition o f
the firs t minimum in the diffraction p attern o f
600-nm light? ( b) R epeat this c alcula tion f or a
music al note o f fre quency 440 Hz (A a bove
middle C). T ake the sp eed of sound to b e 343
m/s .
106 .Wha t are the angular p ositions o f the firs t and
second minima in a diffraction p attern
produced by a slit o f width 0.20 mm tha t is
illumina ted by 400 nm light? Wha t is the
angular width o f the c entral p eak?
107 .How far w ould y ou plac e a screen from the slit
of the previous problem so tha t the sec ond
minimum is a dis tanc e of 2.5 mm from the
center o f the diffraction p attern?
108 .How narro w is a slit tha t pro duces a diffraction
pattern on a screen 1.8 m a way whose c entral
peak is 1.0 m wide? As sume .
109 .Supp ose tha t the c entral p eak o f a single -slit
diffraction p attern is so wide tha t the firs t
minima c an b e as sume d to o ccur a t angular
positions o f . For this c ase, wha t is the
ratio o f the slit width to the w avelength o f the
light?
110 .The c entral diffraction p eak o f the double -slit
inter ferenc e pattern c ontains e xactly nine
fring es. Wha t is the ra tio o f the slit sep aration
to the slit width?
111 .Determine the intensities o f three inter ferenc e
peaks other than the c entral p eak in the
central maximum o f the diffraction , if
possible , when a light o f wavelength 500 nm is
incident normally on a double slit o f width
1000 nm and sep aration 1500 nm . Use the
intensity o f the c entral sp ot to b e .
112 .The y ellow light from a so dium v apor lamp
seems to b e of pure w avelength , but it
produces tw o firs t-order maxima a t
and when projecte d on a 10,000 line
per centimeter diffraction gra ting . Wha t are
the tw o wavelengths to an ac curacy o f 0.1 nm?113 .Structures on a bird f eather act lik e a
reflection gra ting ha ving 8000 lines p er
centimeter . Wha t is the angle o f the firs t-order
maximum f or 600-nm light?
114 .If a diffraction gra ting pro duces a firs t-order
maximum f or the shor test wavelength o f
visible light a t , at wha t angle will the
first-order maximum b e for the larg est
wavelength o f visible light?
115 .(a) Wha t visible w avelength has its f ourth-
order maximum a t an angle o f when
projecte d on a 25,000-line p er centimeter
diffraction gra ting? ( b) Wha t is unre asona ble
about this result? (c) Which as sumptions are
unre asona ble or inc onsis tent?
116 .Consider a sp ectrometer b ased on a diffraction
grating . Construct a problem in which y ou
calcula te the dis tanc e between tw o
wavelengths o f electroma gnetic radia tion in
your sp ectrometer . Among the things to b e
considere d are the w avelengths y ou wish to b e
able to dis tinguish , the numb er o f lines p er
meter on the diffraction gra ting , and the
distanc e from the gra ting to the screen or
detector . Discus s the practic ality o f the devic e
in terms o f being a ble to disc ern b etween
wavelengths o f interes t.
117 .An ama teur as tronomer w ants to build a
telesc ope with a diffraction limit tha t will allo w
him to see if there are p eople on the mo ons o f
Jupiter . (a) Wha t diameter mirror is nee ded to
be able to see 1.00-m detail on a J ovian mo on
at a dis tanc e of from Ear th?
The w avelength o f light a verages 600 nm . (b)
Wha t is unre asona ble a bout this result? (c)
Which as sumptions are unre asona ble or
inconsis tent?
Challenge P roblems
118 .Blue light o f wavelength 450 nm falls on a slit
of width 0.25 mm . A c onverging lens o f focal
length 20 cm is plac ed behind the slit and
focuses the diffraction p attern on a screen . (a)
How far is the screen from the lens? ( b) Wha t
is the dis tanc e between the firs t and the third
minima o f the diffraction p attern?4 • Chap ter Re view 177

119 .(a) As sume tha t the maxima are halfw ay
between the minima o f a single -slit diffraction
pattern . The use the diameter and
circumf erenc e of the phasor dia gram , as
describ ed in Intensity in Single -Slit
Diffraction , to determine the intensities o f the
third and f ourth maxima in terms o f the
intensity o f the c entral maximum . (b) Do the
same c alcula tion , using Equa tion 4.4 .
120 .(a) B y diff erentia ting Equa tion 4.4 , sho w tha t
the higher -order maxima o f the single -slit
diffraction p attern o ccur a t values o fthat
satisfy . (b) Plot and
versus and find the intersections o f these tw o
curves. Wha t inf orma tion do the y giv e you
about the lo cations o f the maxima? (c)
Convinc e yourself tha t these p oints do not
app ear e xactly a t where
but are quite close to these
values .
121 .Wha t is the maximum numb er o f lines p er
centimeter a diffraction gra ting c an ha ve and
produce a c omplete firs t-order sp ectr um f or
visible light?
122 .Sho w tha t a diffraction gra ting c annot pro duce
a sec ond-order maximum f or a giv en
wavelength o f light unles s the firs t-order
maximum is a t an angle les s than .123 .A He -Ne laser b eam is reflecte d from the
surface of a CD onto a w all. The brightes t spot
is the reflecte d beam a t an angle e qual to the
angle o f incidenc e. Ho wever, fring es are also
obser ved. If the w all is 1.50 m from the CD , and
the firs t fring e is 0.600 m from the c entral
maximum , wha t is the sp acing o f gro oves on
the CD ?
124 .Objects view ed through a microsc ope are
plac ed very close to the f ocal point o f the
objectiv e lens . Sho w tha t the minimum
separation xof two objects resolv able through
the microsc ope is giv en b y
where is the f ocal length and Dis the
diameter o f the objectiv e lens as sho wn b elow.
4.7178 4 • Chap ter Re view
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

INTR ODUCTIONCHAP TER 5
Relativity
5.1Invariance o f Phy sical L aws
5.2Relativit y of Simultaneit y
5.3Time Dilation
5.4Length C ontraction
5.5The L orentz Transf ormation
5.6Relativis tic V elocit y Transf ormation
5.7Doppler Ef fect for Light
5.8Relativis tic Momentum
5.9Relativis tic Ener gy
The sp ecial theor y of rela tivity w as prop osed in 1905 b yAlbert Eins tein (1879–1955). It
describ es ho w time , space, and ph ysical phenomena app ear in diff erent frames o f ref erenc e tha t are mo ving a t
constant v elocity with resp ect to e ach other . This diff ers from Eins tein ’s later w ork on g eneral rela tivity , which
Figur e5.1 Special r elativity e xplains ho w time pas ses slightl y diff erently on Ear th and within the r apidl y mo ving
global positioning sat ellite (GPS). GPS units in v ehicles c ould not find their c orrect location on Ear th without taking
this c orrection int o ac count. (cr edit: modification o f work b y U.S. Air F orce)
Chap ter Outline

deals with an y frame o f ref erenc e, including ac celera ted frames .
The theor y of rela tivity le d to a pro found chang e in the w ay we perceive sp ace and time . The “ common sense ”
rules tha t we use to rela te sp ace and time me asurements in the N ewtonian w orldview diff er seriously from the
correct r ules a t speeds ne ar the sp eed of light . For e xample , the sp ecial theor y of rela tivity tells us tha t
measurements o f length and time inter vals are not the same in ref erenc e frames mo ving rela tive to one
another . A p article might b e obser ved to ha ve a lif etime o f in one ref erenc e frame , but a lif etime
of in another; and an object might b e me asure d to b e 2.0 m long in one frame and 3.0 m long in
another frame . These eff ects are usually signific ant only a t speeds c omp arable to the sp eed of light , but ev en a t
the much lo wer sp eeds o f the glob al positioning sa tellite , which re quires e xtremely ac cura te time
measurements to function , the diff erent lengths o f the same dis tanc e in diff erent frames o f ref erenc e are
signific ant enough tha t the y nee d to b e tak en into ac count .
Unlik eNewtonian mechanics , which describ es the motion o f particles , orMaxw ell's e qua tions , which sp ecify
how the electroma gnetic field b ehaves, special rela tivity is not res tricte d to a p articular typ e of phenomenon .
Instead, its r ules on sp ace and time a ffect all fundamental ph ysical theories .
The mo dific ations o f Newtonian mechanics in sp ecial rela tivity do not in valida te clas sical N ewtonian
mechanics or re quire its replac ement . Ins tead, the e qua tions o f rela tivis tic mechanics diff er me aningfully
from those o f clas sical N ewtonian mechanics only f or objects mo ving a t rela tivis tic sp eeds (i .e., sp eeds les s
than , but c omp arable to , the sp eed of light). In the macrosc opic w orld tha t you enc ounter in y our daily lif e, the
rela tivis tic e qua tions re duce to clas sical equa tions , and the pre dictions o f clas sical N ewtonian mechanics
agree closely enough with e xperimental results to disreg ard rela tivis tic c orrections .
5.1Invariance o f Phy sical L aws
Learning Objectiv es
By the end o f this section, y ou wil l be able t o:
•Describe the theor etical and e xperimental issues that Eins tein’s theor y of special r elativit y addr essed.
•State the t wo pos tulates o f the special theor y of relativit y.
Supp ose y ou c alcula te the h ypotenuse o f a right triangle giv en the b ase angles and adjac ent sides . Whether y ou
calcula te the h ypotenuse from one o f the sides and the c osine o f the b ase angle , or from the P ytha gorean
theorem , the results should a gree . Predictions b ased on diff erent principles o f ph ysics mus t also a gree ,
whether w e consider them principles o f mechanics or principles o f electroma gnetism .
Albert Eins tein p ondere d a disa greement b etween pre dictions b ased on electroma gnetism and on
assumptions made in clas sical mechanics . Specific ally, supp ose an obser ver me asures the v elocity o f a light
pulse in the obser ver’s ownrest frame ; tha t is, in the frame o f ref erenc e in which the obser ver is a t res t.
According to the as sumptions long c onsidere d ob vious in clas sical mechanics , if an obser ver me asures a
velocity in one frame o f ref erenc e, and tha t frame o f ref erenc e is mo ving with v elocity past a sec ond
referenc e frame , an obser ver in the sec ond frame me asures the original v elocity as This sum o f
velocities is o ften ref erre d to as Galile an relat ivity. If this principle is c orrect , the pulse o f light tha t the
obser ver me asures as tra veling with sp eedctravels a t speedc+umeasure d in the frame o f the sec ond
obser ver. If w e re asona bly as sume tha t the la ws of electro dynamics are the same in b oth frames o f ref erenc e,
then the pre dicte d sp eed of light (in v acuum) in b oth frames should b e Each obser ver should
measure the same sp eed of the light pulse with resp ect to tha t obser ver’s own res t frame . To rec oncile
difficulties o f this kind , Eins tein c onstructe d his special theor y of relat ivity, which intro duced radic al new
ideas a bout time and sp ace tha t ha ve sinc e been c onfirme d experimentally .
Inertial F rames
All velocities are me asure d rela tive to some frame o f ref erenc e. For e xample , a c ar’s motion is me asure d
rela tive to its s tarting p osition on the ro ad it tra vels on; a projectile ’s motion is me asure d rela tive to the sur face
from which it is la unche d; and a planet ’s orbital motion is me asure d rela tive to the s tar it orbits . The frames o f
referenc e in which mechanics tak es the simples t form are those tha t are not ac celera ting . Newton ’s firs t law,
the la w of iner tia, holds e xactly in such a frame .180 5 • Relativit y
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

For e xample , to a p asseng er inside a plane flying a t constant sp eed and c onstant altitude , physics seems to
work e xactly the same as when the p asseng er is s tanding on the sur face of Ear th. When the plane is taking o ff,
however, ma tters are somewha t more c omplic ated. In this c ase, the p asseng er a t res t inside the plane
concludes tha t a net f orceFon an object is not e qual to the pro duct o f mas s and ac celera tion ,ma. Ins tead,Fis
equal to maplus a fictitious f orce. This situa tion is not as simple as in an iner tial frame . Special rela tivity
handles ac celera ting frames as a c onstant and v elocities as rela tive to the obser ver. General rela tivity tre ats
both v elocity and ac celera tion as rela tive to the obser ver, thus making the use o f cur ved sp ace-time .
Einstein’s First Postulate
Not only are the principles o f clas sical mechanics simples t in iner tial frames , but the y are the same in all
iner tial frames . Eins tein b ased the first postulate of his theor y on the ide a tha t this is tr ue for all the la ws of
physics , not merely those in mechanics .
This p ostula te denies the e xistenc e of a sp ecial or pref erre d iner tial frame . The la ws of na ture do not giv e us a
way to endo w an y one iner tial frame with sp ecial prop erties. For e xample , we cannot identif y an y iner tial
frame as b eing in a s tate of “absolute res t.” We can only determine the rela tive motion o f one frame with
resp ect to another .
There is , however, more to this p ostula te than meets the e ye. The la ws of ph ysics include only those tha t satisfy
this p ostula te. We will see tha t the definitions o f energ y and momentum mus t be altere d to fit this p ostula te.
Another outc ome o f this p ostula te is the famous e qua tion which rela tes energ y to mas s.
Einstein’s Second P ostulate
The sec ond p ostula te up on which Eins tein b ased his theor y of special rela tivity de als with the speed of light .
Late in the nineteenth c entur y, the major tenets o f clas sical ph ysics w ere w ell es tablishe d. Tw o of the mos t
imp ortant w ere the la ws of electroma gnetism and N ewton ’s laws. Investigations such as Y oung ’s double -slit
experiment in the e arly 1800s had c onvincingly demons trated tha t light is a w ave. Maxw ell’s equa tions o f
electroma gnetism implie d tha t electroma gnetic w aves tra vel at in a v acuum , but the y do
not sp ecify the frame o f ref erenc e in which light has this sp eed. Man y typ es o f waves w ere kno wn, and all
travelled in some me dium . Scientis ts theref ore as sume d tha t some me dium c arrie d the light , even in a
vacuum , and tha t light tra vels a t a sp eedcrela tive to tha t me dium (o ften c alled “the aether ”).
Star ting in the mid-1880s , the Americ an ph ysicis t A.A. Michelson , later aide d by E.W. Morle y, made a series o f
direct me asurements o f the sp eed of light . The y intende d to de duce from their da ta the sp eedvat which Ear th
was mo ving through the m ysterious me dium f or light w aves. The sp eed of light me asure d on Ear th should
have been c+vwhen Ear th’s motion w as opp osite to the me dium ’s flo w at speedupast the Ear th, and c–v
when Ear th w as mo ving in the same direction as the me dium . The results o f their me asurements w ere
startling .Inertial Re ference F rame
Aniner tial frame of ref erenc eis a ref erenc e frame in which a b ody a t res t remains a t res t and a b ody in
motion mo ves a t a c onstant sp eed in a s traight line unles s acte d up on b y an outside f orce.
First Postulate o f Special Relativit y
The la ws of ph ysics are the same in all iner tial frames o f ref erenc e.
Michelson-Morle y Experiment
The Michelson-Morle y experiment demons trated tha t the sp eed of light in a v acuum is indep endent o f the5.1 • Inv ariance o f Phy sical L aws 181

The ev entual c onclusion deriv ed from this result is tha t light , unlik e mechanic al w aves such as sound , does not
need a me dium to c arry it. Furthermore , the Michelson-Morle y results implie d tha t the sp eed of light cis
indep endent o f the motion o f the sourc e rela tive to the obser ver. Tha t is, everyone obser ves light to mo ve at
speedcregardles s of ho w the y mo ve rela tive to the light sourc e or to one another . For sev eral y ears, man y
scientis ts trie d unsuc cessfully to e xplain these results within the framew ork o f Newton ’s laws.
In addition , there w as a c ontradiction b etween the principles o f electroma gnetism and the as sumption made
in N ewton ’s laws about rela tive velocity. Clas sically, the v elocity o f an object in one frame o f ref erenc e and the
velocity o f tha t object in a sec ond frame o f ref erenc e rela tive to the firs t should c ombine lik e simple v ectors to
give the v elocity seen in the sec ond frame . If tha t were c orrect , then tw o obser vers mo ving a t diff erent sp eeds
would see light tra veling a t diff erent sp eeds. Ima gine wha t a light w ave would lo ok lik e to a p erson tra veling
along with it (in v acuum) a t a sp eedc. If such a motion w ere p ossible , then the w ave would b e stationar y
rela tive to the obser ver. It w ould ha ve electric and ma gnetic fields whose s trengths v arie d with p osition but
were c onstant in time . This is not allo wed by Maxw ell’s equa tions . So either Maxw ell’s equa tions are diff erent
in diff erent iner tial frames , or an object with mas s cannot tra vel at speedc. Eins tein c onclude d tha t the la tter
is tr ue: An object with mas s cannot tra vel at speedc. Maxw ell’s equa tions are c orrect , but N ewton ’s addition o f
velocities is not c orrect f or light .
Not until 1905, when Eins tein publishe d his firs t paper on sp ecial rela tivity , was the currently ac cepte d
conclusion re ache d. Base d mos tly on his analy sis tha t the la ws of electricity and ma gnetism w ould not allo w
another sp eed for light , and only slightly a ware o f the Michelson-Morle y experiment , Eins tein detaile d his
second p ostulate of sp ecial relat ivity.
In other w ords , the sp eed of light has the same definite sp eed for an y obser ver, reg ardles s of the rela tive
motion o f the sourc e. This dec eptiv ely simple and c ounterintuitiv e postula te, along with the firs t postula te,
leave all else op en f or chang e. Among the chang es are the los s of agreement on the time b etween ev ents , the
varia tion o f dis tanc e with sp eed, and the re aliza tion tha t ma tter and energ y can b e converted into one another .
We describ e these c oncepts in the f ollowing sections .
CHE CK Y OUR UNDER STANDING 5.1
Explain ho w sp ecial rela tivity diff ers from g eneral rela tivity .
5.2Relativit y of Simultaneit y
Learning Objectiv es
By the end o f this section, y ou wil l be able t o:
•Show from Eins tein's pos tulates that t wo events measur ed as simultaneous in one iner tial fr ame ar e no t
necessarily simultaneous in all iner tial fr ames .
•Describe ho w simultaneit y is a r elativ e concep t for obser vers in dif ferent iner tial fr ames in r elativ e mo tion.
Do time inter vals dep end on who obser ves them? Intuitiv ely, it seems tha t the time f or a pro cess, such as the
elapse d time f or a f oot rac e (Figure 5.2 ), should b e the same f or all obser vers. In ev eryday experienc es,
disa greements o ver elapse d time ha ve to do with the ac curacy o f me asuring time . No one w ould b e lik ely to
argue tha t the actual time inter val w as diff erent f or the mo ving r unner and f or the s tationar y clo ck displa yed.
Carefully c onsidering jus t ho w time is me asure d, however, sho ws tha t elapse d time do es dep ends on the
rela tive motion o f an obser ver with resp ect to the pro cess being me asure d.motion o f Ear th a bout the Sun .
Second P ostulate o f Special Relativit y
Light tra vels in a v acuum with the same sp eedcin an y direction in all iner tial frames .182 5 • Relativit y
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Figur e5.2 Elapsed time f or a f oot r ace is the same f or al l obser vers, but at r elativis tic speeds , elapsed time depends on the motion o f the
obser ver relativ e to the location wher e the pr ocess being timed oc curs . (credit: " Jason E dward Sc ott Bain "/Flickr)
Consider ho w w e me asure elapse d time . If w e use a s topwatch, for e xample , how do w e kno w when to s tart and
stop the w atch? One metho d is to use the arriv al of light from the ev ent. For e xample , if y ou’re in a mo ving c ar
and obser ve the light arriving from a tra ffic signal chang e from green to re d, you kno w it’s time to s tep on the
brak e pedal. The timing is more ac cura te if some sor t of electronic detection is use d, avoiding human re action
times and other c omplic ations .
Now supp ose tw o obser vers use this metho d to me asure the time inter val between tw o flashes o f light from
flash lamps tha t are a dis tanc e ap art (Figure 5.3 ). An obser verAis se ated midw ay on a rail c ar with tw o flash
lamps a t opp osite sides e quidis tant from her . A pulse o f light is emit ted from e ach flash lamp and mo ves
toward obser verA, sho wn in frame (a) o f the figure . The rail c ar is mo ving rapidly in the direction indic ated by
the v elocity v ector in the dia gram . An obser verBstanding on the pla tform is facing the rail c ar as it p asses and
obser ves b oth flashes o f light re ach him simultaneously , as sho wn in frame (c). He me asures the dis tanc es
from where he sa w the pulses origina te, finds them e qual , and c oncludes tha t the pulses w ere emit ted
simultaneously .
However, because o f Obser verA’s motion , the pulse from the right o f the railc ar, from the direction the c ar is
moving , reaches her b efore the pulse from the left , as sho wn in frame ( b). She also me asures the dis tanc es
from within her frame o f ref erenc e, finds them e qual , and c oncludes tha t the pulses w ere not emit ted
simultaneously .
The tw o obser vers re ach c onflicting c onclusions a bout whether the tw o ev ents a t well-sep arated locations
were simultaneous . Both frames o f ref erenc e are v alid , and b oth c onclusions are v alid . Whether tw o ev ents a t
separate lo cations are simultaneous dep ends on the motion o f the obser ver rela tive to the lo cations o f the
events .5.2 • Relativit y of Simultaneit y 183

Figur e5.3 (a) T wo pulses o f light ar e emit ted simul taneousl y relativ e to obser verB. (c) The pulses r each obser verB’s position
simul taneousl y. (b) Because o fA’s motion, she sees the pulse fr om the right firs t and c oncludes the bulbs did not flash simul taneousl y.
Both c onclusions ar e correct.
Here , the rela tive velocity b etween obser vers a ffects whether tw o ev ents a dis tanc e ap art are obser ved to b e
simultaneous .Simultaneity is not a bsolute . We might ha ve gues sed (inc orrectly ) tha t if light is emit ted
simultaneously , then tw o obser vers halfw ay between the sourc es w ould see the flashes simultaneously . But
careful analy sis sho ws this c annot b e the c ase if the sp eed of light is the same in all iner tial frames .
This typ e ofthought e xperiment (in German , “Gedank enexperiment ”) sho ws tha t seemingly ob vious
conclusions mus t be chang ed to a gree with the p ostula tes o f rela tivity . The v alidity o f thought e xperiments c an
only b e determine d by actual obser vation , and c areful e xperiments ha ve rep eatedly c onfirme d Eins tein ’s
theor y of rela tivity .184 5 • Relativit y
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

5.3Time Dilation
Learning Objectiv es
By the end o f this section, y ou wil l be able t o:
•Explain ho w time inter vals can be measur ed dif ferently in dif ferent r eference fr ames .
•Describe ho w to dis tinguish a pr oper time inter val from a dilated time inter val.
•Describe the significance o f the muon e xperiment .
•Explain why the t win par adox is no t a contr adiction.
•Calculate time dilation giv en the speed o f an objec t in a giv en fr ame.
The analy sis o f simultaneity sho ws tha t Eins tein ’s postula tes imply an imp ortant eff ect: Time inter vals ha ve
different v alues when me asure d in diff erent iner tial frames . Supp ose, for e xample , an as trona ut me asures the
time it tak es for a pulse o f light to tra vel a dis tanc e perpendicular to the direction o f his ship ’s motion (rela tive
to an e arthbound obser ver), b ounc e off a mirror , and return ( Figure 5.4 ). Ho w do es the elapse d time tha t the
astrona ut me asures in the sp acecra ft comp are with the elapse d time tha t an e arthbound obser ver me asures
by obser ving wha t is happ ening in the sp acecra ft?
Examining this ques tion le ads to a pro found result . The elapse d time f or a pro cess dep ends on which obser ver
is me asuring it . In this c ase, the time me asure d by the as trona ut (within the sp aceship where the as trona ut is
at res t) is smaller than the time me asure d by the e arthbound obser ver (to whom the as trona ut is mo ving ). The
time elapse d for the same pro cess is diff erent f or the obser vers, because the dis tanc e the light pulse tra vels in
the as trona ut’s frame is smaller than in the e arthbound frame , as seen in Figure 5.4 . Light tra vels a t the same
speed in e ach frame , so it tak es more time to tra vel the gre ater dis tanc e in the e arthbound frame .5.3 • Time Dilation 185

Figur e5.4 (a) An as tronaut measur es the time for light t o travel dis tanc e 2Din the as tronaut ’s frame . (b) A NASA scientis t on Ear th
sees the light f ollow the long er path 2 sand tak e a long er time (c) These triangles ar e used t o find the r elationship betw een the tw o
distanc esDand s.
To quantita tively c omp are the time me asurements in the tw o iner tial frames , we can rela te the dis tanc es in
Figure 5.4 to each other , then e xpres s each dis tanc e in terms o f the time o f tra vel (resp ectiv ely either or )
of the pulse in the c orresp onding ref erenc e frame . The resulting e qua tion c an then b e solv ed for in terms o f
The lengths Dand LinFigure 5.4 are the sides o f a right triangle with h ypotenuse s. From the P ytha gorean
theorem ,
The lengths 2 sand 2 Lare, resp ectiv ely, the dis tanc es tha t the pulse o f light and the sp acecra ft tra vel in time
in the e arthbound obser ver’s frame . The length Dis the dis tanc e tha t the light pulse tra vels in time in theTime Dilation
Time dilat ion is the lengthening o f the time inter val between tw o ev ents f or an obser ver in an iner tial
frame tha t is mo ving with resp ect to the res t frame o f the ev ents (in which the ev ents o ccur a t the same
location).186 5 • Relativit y
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

astrona ut’s frame . This giv es us three e qua tions:
Note tha t we use d Eins tein ’s sec ond p ostula te by taking the sp eed of light to b ecin b oth iner tial frames . We
subs titute these results into the previous e xpres sion from the P ytha gorean theorem:
Then w e re arrang e to obtain
Finally , solving f or in terms o f gives us
This is e quiv alent to
where is the rela tivis tic factor (o ften c alled the Lorentz factor ) giv en b y
and vand care the sp eeds o f the mo ving obser ver and light , resp ectiv ely.
Note the as ymmetr y between the tw o me asurements . Only one o f them is a me asurement o f the time inter val
between tw o ev ents —the emis sion and arriv al of the light pulse —at the same p osition . It is a me asurement o f
the time inter val in the res t frame o f a single clo ck. The me asurement in the e arthbound frame in volves
comp aring the time inter val between tw o ev ents tha t occur a t diff erent lo cations . The time inter val between
events tha t occur a t a single lo cation has a sep arate name to dis tinguish it from the time me asure d by the
earthbound obser ver, and w e use the sep arate symb ol to ref er to it throughout this chapter .
The e qua tion rela ting and istruly remarka ble. First, as s tated earlier , elapse d time is not the same f or
different obser vers mo ving rela tive to one another , even though b oth are in iner tial frames . A prop er time
inter val for an obser ver who , like the as trona ut, is mo ving with the app aratus, is smaller than the time
inter val for other obser vers. It is the smalles t possible me asure d time b etween tw o ev ents . The e arthbound
obser ver sees time inter vals within the mo ving s ystem as dila ted (i.e., lengthene d) rela tive to ho w the obser ver
moving rela tive to Ear th sees them within the mo ving s ystem . Alterna tively, according to the e arthbound
obser ver, les s time p asses b etween ev ents within the mo ving frame . Note tha t the shor test elapse d time
between ev ents is in the iner tial frame in which the obser ver sees the ev ents (e .g., the emis sion and arriv al of
the light signal) o ccur a t the same p oint .
This time eff ect is re al and is not c aused by inac cura te clo cks or improp er me asurements . Time -inter val
measurements o f the same ev ent diff er for obser vers in rela tive motion . The dila tion o f time is an intrinsic
prop erty of time itself. A ll clo cks mo ving rela tive to an obser ver, including biologic al clo cks, such as a p erson ’s
heartbeat, or a ging , are obser ved to r un more slo wly c omp ared with a clo ck tha t is s tationar y rela tive to the5.1
5.2
Proper Time
The prop er time inter val between tw o ev ents is the time inter val me asure d by an obser ver for whom
both ev ents o ccur a t the same lo cation .5.3 • Time Dilation 187

obser ver.
Note tha t if the rela tive velocity is much les s than the sp eed of light then is extremely small , and
the elapse d times and are ne arly e qual . At low velocities , physics b ased on mo dern rela tivity appro aches
clas sical ph ysics —everyday experienc es in volve very small rela tivis tic eff ects . Ho wever, for sp eeds ne ar the
speed of light , is close to one , so is very small and becomes signific antly larg er than
Half-Life of a Muon
There is c onsidera ble e xperimental evidenc e tha t the e qua tion is correct . One e xample is f ound in
cosmic ra y particles tha t continuously rain do wn on Ear th from deep sp ace. Some c ollisions o f these p articles
with nuclei in the upp er a tmosphere result in shor t-lived particles c alledmuons . The half -life (amount o f time
for half o f a ma terial to dec ay) of a muon is 1.52 μ s when it is a t res t rela tive to the obser ver who me asures the
half -life. This is the prop er time inter val This shor t time allo ws very few muons to re ach Ear th’s sur face
and b e detecte d if N ewtonian as sumptions a bout time and sp ace were c orrect . Ho wever, muons pro duced by
cosmic ra y particles ha ve a rang e of velocities , with some mo ving ne ar the sp eed of light . It has b een f ound tha t
the muon ’s half -life as me asure d by an e arthbound obser ver ( ) varies with v elocity e xactly as pre dicte d by
the e qua tion The fas ter the muon mo ves, the long er it liv es. We on Ear th see the muon las t much
long er than its half -life pre dicts within its o wn res t frame . As view ed from our frame , the muon dec ays more
slowly than it do es when a t res t rela tive to us . A far larg er fraction o f muons re ach the ground as a result .
Before w e present the firs t example o f solving a problem in rela tivity , we state a s trategy you c an use as a
guideline f or these c alcula tions .
PROBLEM-SOL VING S TRATEGY
Relativity
1. Mak e a lis t of wha t is giv en or c an b e inf erre d from the problem as s tated (identif y the kno wns). Lo ok in
particular f or inf orma tion on rela tive velocity v.
2. Identif y exactly wha t nee ds to b e determine d in the problem (identif y the unkno wns).
3. Mak e certain y ou unders tand the c onceptual asp ects o f the problem b efore making an y calcula tions
(expres s the ans wer as an e qua tion). Decide , for e xample , which obser ver sees time dila ted or length
contracte d before w orking with the e qua tions or using them to c arry out the c alcula tion . If y ou ha ve
thought a bout who sees wha t, who is mo ving with the ev ent b eing obser ved, who sees prop er time , and so
on, you will find it much e asier to determine if y our c alcula tion is re asona ble.
4. Determine the primar y typ e of calcula tion to b e done to find the unkno wns identifie d above (do the
calcula tion). Y ou will find the section summar y helpful in determining whether a length c ontraction ,
rela tivis tic kinetic energ y, or some other c oncept is in volved.
Notethat you should not round o ff during the c alcula tion . As note d in the te xt, you mus t often p erform y our
calcula tions to man y digits to see the desire d eff ect. You ma y round o ff at the v ery end o f the problem solution ,
but do not use a rounde d numb er in a subse quent c alcula tion . Also, check the ans wer to see if it is re asona ble:
Does it mak e sense? This ma y be more difficult f or rela tivity , which has f ew ev eryday examples to pro vide
experienc e with wha t is re asona ble. But you c an lo ok for v elocities gre ater than cor rela tivis tic eff ects tha t are
in the wrong direction (such as a time c ontraction where a dila tion w as e xpecte d).
EXAMPLE 5.1
Time Dila tion in a High-Speed V ehicle
The Hyp ersonic T echnolog y Vehicle 2 (HT V-2) is an e xperimental ro cket vehicle c apable o f tra veling a t 21,000
km/h (5830 m/s). If an electronic clo ck in the HT V-2 me asures a time inter val of exactly 1-s dura tion , wha t
would obser vers on Ear th me asure the time inter val to b e?188 5 • Relativit y
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Strategy
Apply the time dila tion f ormula to rela te the prop er time inter val of the signal in HT V-2 to the time inter val
measure d on the ground .
Solution
a.Identif y the kno wns:
b.Identif y the unkno wn:
c.Expres s the ans wer as an e qua tion:
d.Do the c alcula tion . Use the e xpres sion f or to determine from :
Significanc e
The v ery high sp eed of the HT V-2 is s till only 10-5times the sp eed of light . Relativis tic eff ects f or the HT V-2 are
negligible f or almos t all purp oses , but are not z ero.
EXAMPLE 5.2
Wha t Speeds ar e Relativis tic?
How fas t mus t a v ehicle tra vel for 1 sec ond o f time me asure d on a p asseng er’s watch in the v ehicle to diff er b y
1% f or an obser ver me asuring it from the ground outside?
Strategy
Use the time dila tion f ormula to find v/cfor the giv en ra tio o f times .
Solution
a.Identif y the kno wn:
b.Identif y the unkno wn: v/c.
c.Expres s the ans wer as an e qua tion:
d.Do the c alcula tion:
Significanc e
The result sho ws tha t an object mus t tra vel at very roughly 10% o f the sp eed of light f or its motion to pro duce5.3 • Time Dilation 189

signific ant rela tivis tic time dila tion eff ects .
EXAMPLE 5.3
Calcula ting for a R elativis tic Ev ent
Supp ose a c osmic ra y colliding with a nucleus in Ear th’s upp er a tmosphere pro duces a muon tha t has a
velocity The muon then tra vels a t constant v elocity and liv es 2.20 μ s as me asure d in the muon ’s
frame o f ref erenc e. (You c an ima gine this as the muon ’s internal clo ck.) Ho w long do es the muon liv e as
measure d by an e arthbound obser ver (Figure 5.5 )?
Figur e5.5 A muon in Ear th’s atmospher e liv es long er as measur ed b y an ear thbound obser ver than as measur ed b y the muon ’s int ernal
clock.
As w e will discus s later, in the muon ’s ref erenc e frame , it tra vels a shor ter dis tanc e than me asure d in Ear th’s
referenc e frame .
Strategy
A clo ck mo ving with the muon me asures the prop er time o f its dec ay pro cess, so the time w e are giv en is
The e arthbound obser ver me asures as giv en b y the e qua tion Because the v elocity
is giv en, we can c alcula te the time in Ear th’s frame o f ref erenc e.
Solution
a.Identif y the kno wns:
b.Identif y the unkno wn:
c.Expres s the ans wer as an e qua tion . Use:
with
d.Do the c alcula tion . Use the e xpres sion f or to determine from190 5 • Relativit y
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Rememb er to k eep e xtra signific ant figures until the final ans wer.
Significanc e
One implic ation o f this e xample is tha t because at 95.0% o f the sp eed of light the
rela tivis tic eff ects are signific ant. The tw o time inter vals diff er b y a factor o f 3.20, when clas sically the y would
be the same . Something mo ving a t 0.950 cis said to b e highly rela tivis tic.
EXAMPLE 5.4
Relativis tic T elevision
A non-fla t screen , older -style television displa y (Figure 5.6 ) works b y ac celera ting electrons o ver a shor t
distanc e to rela tivis tic sp eed, and then using electroma gnetic fields to c ontrol where the electron b eam s trikes
a fluoresc ent la yer a t the front o f the tub e. Supp ose the electrons tra vel at through a dis tanc e
of from the s tart of the b eam to the screen . (a) Wha t is the time o f tra vel of an electron in the res t frame
of the television set? ( b) Wha t is the electron ’s time o f tra vel in its o wn res t frame?
Figur e5.6 The electr on beam in a cathode r ay tube t elevision displa y.
Strategy for (a)
(a) C alcula te the time from Even though the sp eed is rela tivis tic, the c alcula tion is entirely in one frame
of ref erenc e, and rela tivity is theref ore not in volved.5.3 • Time Dilation 191

Solution
a.Identif y the kno wns:
b.Identif y the unkno wn: the time o f tra vel
c.Expres s the ans wer as an e qua tion:
d.Do the c alcula tion:
Significanc e
The time o f tra vel is e xtremely shor t, as e xpecte d. Bec ause the c alcula tion is entirely within a single frame o f
referenc e, rela tivity is not in volved, even though the electron sp eed is close to c.
Strategy for (b)
(b) In the frame o f ref erenc e of the electron , the v acuum tub e is mo ving and the electron is s tationar y. The
electron-emit ting c athode le aves the electron and the front o f the v acuum tub e strikes the electron with the
electron a t the same lo cation . Theref ore w e use the time dila tion f ormula to rela te the prop er time in the
electron res t frame to the time in the television frame .
Solution
a.Identif y the kno wns (from p art a):
b.Identif y the unkno wn:
c.Expres s the ans wer as an e qua tion:
d.Do the c alcula tion:
Significanc e
The time o f tra vel is shor ter in the electron frame o f ref erenc e. Bec ause the problem re quires finding the time
inter val me asure d in diff erent ref erenc e frames f or the same pro cess, rela tivity is in volved. If w e had trie d to
calcula te the time in the electron res t frame b y simply dividing the 0.200 m b y the sp eed, the result w ould b e
slightly inc orrect b ecause o f the rela tivis tic sp eed of the electron .
CHE CK Y OUR UNDER STANDING 5.2
Wha t is if
The T win P aradox
An intriguing c onse quenc e of time dila tion is tha t a sp ace tra veler mo ving a t a high v elocity rela tive to Ear th
would a ge les s than the as trona ut’s earthbound twin . This is o ften kno wn as the twin p arado x. Ima gine the
astrona ut mo ving a t such a v elocity tha t as in Figure 5.7 . A trip tha t tak es 2.00 y ears in her frame
would tak e 60.0 y ears in the e arthbound twin ’s frame . Supp ose the as trona ut tra vels 1.00 y ear to another s tar192 5 • Relativit y
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

system , briefly e xplores the are a, and then tra vels 1.00 y ear b ack. An as trona ut who w as 40 y ears old a t the
start of the trip w ould b e would b e 42 when the sp aceship returns . Everything on Ear th, however, would ha ve
aged 60.0 y ears. The e arthbound twin , if s till aliv e, would b e 100 y ears old .
The situa tion w ould seem diff erent to the as trona ut in Figure 5.7 . Bec ause motion is rela tive, the sp aceship
would seem to b e stationar y and Ear th w ould app ear to mo ve. (This is the sensa tion y ou ha ve when flying in a
jet.) Lo oking out the windo w of the sp aceship , the as trona ut w ould see time slo w do wn on Ear th b y a factor o f
Seen from the sp aceship , the e arthbound sibling will ha ve aged only 2/30, or 0.07, o f a y ear, where as
the as trona ut w ould ha ve aged 2.00 y ears.
Figur e5.7 The twin par adox consis ts of the c onflicting c onclusions about which twin ag es mor e as a r esul t of a long spac e journe y at
relativis tic speed.
The p arado x here is tha t the tw o twins c annot b oth b e correct . As with all p arado xes, conflicting c onclusions
come from a false premise . In fact , the as trona ut’s motion is signific antly diff erent from tha t of the e arthbound
twin . The as trona ut ac celera tes to a high v elocity and then ac celera tes opp osite to the motion to view the s tar
system . To return to Ear th, she a gain ac celera tes and dec elera tes. The sp acecra ft is not in a single iner tial
frame to which the time dila tion f ormula c an b e directly applie d. Tha t is, the as trona ut twin chang es iner tial
referenc es. The e arthbound twin do es not e xperienc e these ac celera tions and remains in the same iner tial
frame . Thus , the situa tion is not s ymmetric , and it is inc orrect to claim tha t the as trona ut obser ves the same
effects as her twin . The lack o f symmetr y between the twins will b e still more evident when w e analyz e the
journe y later in this chapter in terms o f the p ath the as trona ut follows through f our-dimensional sp ace-time .
In 1971, Americ an ph ysicis ts Joseph Ha fele and Richard K eating v erifie d time dila tion a t low rela tive velocities
by flying e xtremely ac cura te atomic clo cks around the w orld on c ommercial aircra ft. The y me asure d elapse d
time to an ac curacy o f a few nanosec onds and c omp ared it with the time me asure d by clo cks left b ehind .
Hafele and K eating ’s results w ere within e xperimental unc ertainties o f the pre dictions o f rela tivity . Both
special and g eneral rela tivity had to b e tak en into ac count , because gra vity and ac celera tions w ere in volved as
well as rela tive motion .
CHE CK Y OUR UNDER STANDING 5.3
a. A p article tra vels a t and liv es when a t res t rela tive to an obser ver. Ho w long
does the p article liv e as view ed in the la boratory?
b. Spacecra ftAand Bpass in opp osite directions a t a rela tive sp eed of An internal clo ck in5.3 • Time Dilation 193

spacecra ftAcauses it to emit a radio signal f or 1.00 s . The c omputer in sp acecra ftBcorrects f or the b eginning
and end o f the signal ha ving tra veled diff erent dis tanc es, to c alcula te the time inter val during which ship Awas
emit ting the signal . Wha t is the time inter val tha t the c omputer in sp acecra ftBcalcula tes?
5.4Length C ontraction
Learning Objectiv es
By the end o f this section, y ou wil l be able t o:
•Explain ho w simultaneit y and length contr action ar e related.
•Describe the r elation be tween length contr action and time dilation and use it to deriv e the length-contr action
equation.
The length o f the train c ar in Figure 5.8 is the same f or all the p asseng ers. All of them w ould a gree on the
simultaneous lo cation o f the tw o ends o f the c ar and obtain the same result f or the dis tanc e between them . But
simultaneous ev ents in one iner tial frame nee d not b e simultaneous in another . If the train c ould tra vel at
rela tivis tic sp eeds, an obser ver on the ground w ould see the simultaneous lo cations o f the tw o endp oints o f the
car a t a diff erent dis tanc e ap art than obser vers inside the c ar. Me asure d dis tanc es nee d not b e the same f or
different obser vers when rela tivis tic sp eeds are in volved.
Figur e5.8 People might describe dis tanc es diff erently, but at r elativis tic speeds , the dis tanc es really are diff erent. (cr edit:
“russavia”/Flickr)
Proper L ength
Two obser vers p assing e ach other alw ays see the same v alue o f their rela tive sp eed. Even though time dila tion
implies tha t the train p asseng er and the obser ver standing alongside the tracks me asure diff erent times f or
the train to p ass, the y still a gree tha t rela tive sp eed, which is dis tanc e divide d by elapse d time , is the same . If
an obser ver on the ground and one on the train me asure a diff erent time f or the length o f the train to p ass the
ground obser ver, agreeing on their rela tive sp eed me ans the y mus t also see diff erent dis tanc es tra veled.
The muon discus sed in Example 5.3 illus trates this c oncept ( Figure 5.9 ). To an obser ver on Ear th, the muon
travels a t 0.950 cfor 7.05 μ s from the time it is pro duced until it dec ays. Theref ore, it tra vels a dis tanc e rela tive
to Ear th o f:
In the muon frame , the lif etime o f the muon is 2.20 μ s. In this frame o f ref erenc e, the Ear th, air, and ground
have only enough time to tra vel:
The dis tanc e between the same tw o ev ents (pro duction and dec ay of a muon) dep ends on who me asures it and
how the y are mo ving rela tive to it .194 5 • Relativit y
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

The e arthbound obser ver me asures the prop er length because the p oints a t which the muon is pro duced
and dec ays are s tationar y rela tive to Ear th. To the muon , Ear th, air, and clouds are mo ving , so the dis tanc eLit
sees is not the prop er length .
Figur e5.9 (a) The ear thbound obser ver sees the muon tr avel 2.01 km. (b) The same path has length 0.627 km seen fr om the muon ’s
frame o f reference. The Ear th, air , and clouds ar e mo ving r elativ e to the muon in its fr ame , and ha ve smal ler lengths along the dir ection o f
travel.
Length C ontraction
To rela te dis tanc es me asure d by diff erent obser vers, note tha t the v elocity rela tive to the e arthbound obser ver
in our muon e xample is giv en b y
The time rela tive to the e arthbound obser ver is because the object b eing time d is mo ving rela tive to this
obser ver. The v elocity rela tive to the mo ving obser ver is giv en b y
The mo ving obser ver tra vels with the muon and theref ore obser ves the prop er time The tw o velocities are
identic al; thus ,
We kno w tha t Subs tituting this e qua tion into the rela tionship a bove giv es
Subs tituting f or gives an e qua tion rela ting the dis tanc es me asure d by diff erent obser vers.Proper L ength
Proper length is the dis tanc e between tw o points me asure d by an obser ver who is a t res t rela tive to
both o f the p oints .
5.3
Length C ontraction
Length c ontract ion is the decre ase in the me asure d length o f an object from its prop er length when
measure d in a ref erenc e frame tha t is mo ving with resp ect to the object:
5.45.4 • L ength C ontraction 195

If we me asure the length o f an ything mo ving rela tive to our frame , we find its length Lto b e smaller than the
prop er length that would b e me asure d if the object w ere s tationar y. For e xample , in the muon ’s res t frame ,
the dis tanc e Ear th mo ves b etween where the muon w as pro duced and where it dec ayed is shor ter than the
distanc e tra veled as seen from the Ear th’s frame . Those p oints are fix ed rela tive to Ear th but are mo ving
rela tive to the muon . Clouds and other objects are also c ontracte d along the direction o f motion as seen from
muon ’s res t frame .
Thus , two obser vers me asure diff erent dis tanc es along their direction o f rela tive motion , dep ending on which
one is me asuring dis tanc es b etween objects a t res t.
But wha t about dis tanc es me asure d in a direction p erpendicular to the rela tive motion? Ima gine tw o obser vers
moving along their x-axes and p assing e ach other while holding meter s ticks v ertically in the y-direction .
Figure 5.10 shows tw o meter s ticks M and that are a t res t in the ref erenc e frames o f two boys S and
resp ectiv ely. A small p aintbr ush is a ttache d to the top (the 100- cm mark) o f stick Supp ose tha t is
moving to the right a t a v ery high sp eedvrela tive to S, and the s ticks are oriente d so tha t the y are
perpendicular , or trans verse , to their rela tive velocity v ector . The s ticks are held so tha t as the y pass each
other , their lo wer ends (the 0- cm marks) c oincide . Assume tha t when S lo oks a t his s tick M a fterwards , he finds
a line p ainte d on it , jus t below the top o f the s tick . Bec ause the br ush is a ttache d to the top o f the other b oy’s
stick S can only c onclude tha t stick is les s than 1.0 m long .
Figur e5.10 Meter sticks M and are stationar y in the r eference frames o f obser vers S and respectiv ely. As the s ticks pas s, a smal l
brush at tached t o the 100- cm mark o f paints a line on M.
Now when the b oys appro ach e ach other , like S, sees a meter s tick mo ving to ward him with sp eedv.
Because their situa tions are s ymmetric , each b oy mus t mak e the same me asurement o f the s tick in the other
frame . So, if S me asures s tick to b e les s than 1.0 m long ,mus t me asure s tick M to b e also les s than 1.0 m
long , and mus t see his p aintbr ush p ass over the top o f stick M and not p aint a line on it . In other w ords , after
the same ev ent, one b oy sees a p ainte d line on a s tick , while the other do es not see such a line on tha t same
stick!
Eins tein ’s firs t postula te re quires tha t the la ws of ph ysics (as , for e xample , applie d to p ainting ) pre dict tha t S
and who are b oth in iner tial frames , mak e the same obser vations; tha t is, S and mus t either b oth see a
line p ainte d on s tick M, or b oth not see tha t line . We are theref ore f orced to c onclude our original as sumption
that S sa w a line p ainte d below the top o f his s tick w as wrong! Ins tead, S finds the line p ainte d right a t the
100- cm mark on M. Then b oth b oys will a gree tha t a line is p ainte d on M, and the y will also a gree tha t both
sticks are e xactly 1 m long . We conclude then tha t me asurements o f a trans verse length mus t be the same in
different iner tial frames .where is the length o f the object in its res t frame , and Lis the length in the frame mo ving with v elocity v.196 5 • Relativit y
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

EXAMPLE 5.5
Calcula ting L ength Contr action
Supp ose an as trona ut, such as the twin in the twin p arado x discus sion , tra vels so fas t tha t (a) The
astrona ut tra vels from Ear th to the ne ares t star s ystem , Alpha C enta uri, 4.300 light y ears ( ly) away as
measure d by an e arthbound obser ver. Ho w far ap art are Ear th and A lpha C enta uri as me asure d by the
astrona ut? ( b) In terms o fc, wha t is the as trona ut’s velocity rela tive to Ear th? Y ou ma y neglect the motion o f
Earth rela tive to the sun ( Figure 5.11 ).
Figur e5.11 (a) The ear thbound obser ver measur es the pr oper dis tanc e betw een Ear th and Alpha Centauri. (b) The as tronaut obser ves a
length c ontr action because Ear th and Alpha Centauri mo ve relativ e to her ship . She can tr avel this shor ter dis tanc e in a smal ler time (her
proper time) without e xceeding the speed o f light.
Strategy
First, note tha t a light y ear (ly) is a c onvenient unit o f dis tanc e on an as tronomic al sc ale—it is the dis tanc e light
travels in a y ear. For p art (a), the 4.300-ly dis tanc e between A lpha C enta uri and Ear th is the prop er dis tanc e
because it is me asure d by an e arthbound obser ver to whom b oth s tars are (appro xima tely) stationar y. To
the as trona ut, Ear th and A lpha C enta uri are mo ving p ast at the same v elocity, so the dis tanc e between them is
the c ontracte d length L. In p art (b), w e are giv en so w e can find vby re arranging the definition o fto expres s
vin terms o fc.
Solution f or (a)
For p art (a):
a.Identif y the kno wns:
b.Identif y the unkno wn: L.
c.Expres s the ans wer as an e qua tion:
d.Do the c alcula tion:5.4 • L ength C ontraction 197

Solution f or (b)
For p art (b):
a.Identif y the kno wn:
b.Identif y the unkno wn: vin terms o fc.
c.Expres s the ans wer as an e qua tion . Star t with:
Then solv e for the unkno wnv/cby firs t squaring b oth sides and then re arranging:
d.Do the c alcula tion:
or
Significanc e
Rememb er not to round o ff calcula tions until the final ans wer, or y ou c ould g et erroneous results . This is
especially tr ue for sp ecial rela tivity c alcula tions , where the diff erenc es might only b e rev ealed after sev eral
decimal plac es. The rela tivis tic eff ect is larg e here and w e see tha tvis appro aching (not e qualing )
the sp eed of light . Bec ause the dis tanc e as me asure d by the as trona ut is so much smaller , the as trona ut can
travel it in much les s time in her frame .
People tra veling a t extremely high v elocities c ould c over very larg e dis tanc es (thousands or ev en millions o f
light y ears) and a ge only a f ew y ears on the w ay. Ho wever, like emigrants in p ast centuries who left their home ,
these p eople w ould le ave the Ear th the y kno w forev er. Even if the y returne d, thousands to millions o f years
would ha ve passed on Ear th, oblitera ting mos t of wha t no w exists. There is also a more serious practic al
obstacle to tra veling a t such v elocities; immensely gre ater energies w ould b e nee ded to achiev e such high
velocities than clas sical ph ysics pre dicts c an b e attaine d. This will b e discus sed later in the chapter .
Why don ’t we notic e length c ontraction in ev eryday life? The dis tanc e to the gro cery store do es not seem to
dep end on whether w e are mo ving or not . Examining the e qua tion we see tha t at low
velocities the lengths are ne arly e qual , which is the clas sical expecta tion . But length c ontraction is
real, if not c ommonly e xperienc ed. For e xample , a charg ed particle such as an electron tra veling a t rela tivis tic
velocity has electric field lines tha t are c ompres sed along the direction o f motion as seen b y a s tationar y
obser ver (Figure 5.12 ). As the electron p asses a detector , such as a c oil o f wire , its field interacts much more198 5 • Relativit y
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

briefly , an eff ect obser ved at particle ac celera tors such as the 3-km-long Stanf ord Line ar A ccelera tor (SL AC). In
fact , to an electron tra veling do wn the b eam pip e at SL AC, the ac celera tor and Ear th are all mo ving b y and are
length c ontracte d. The rela tivis tic eff ect is so gre at tha t the ac celera tor is only 0.5 m long to the electron . It is
actually e asier to g et the electron b eam do wn the pip e, because the b eam do es not ha ve to b e as precisely
aime d to g et do wn a shor t pip e as it w ould to g et do wn a pip e 3 km long . This , again, is an e xperimental
verific ation o f the sp ecial theor y of rela tivity .
Figur e5.12 The electric field lines o f a high-v elocity char ged par ticle ar e compr essed along the dir ection o f motion b y length c ontr action,
producing an obser vably diff erent signal as the par ticle g oes thr ough a c oil.
CHE CK Y OUR UNDER STANDING 5.4
A particle is tra veling through Ear th’s atmosphere a t a sp eed of 0.750 c. To an e arthbound obser ver, the
distanc e it tra vels is 2.50 km . Ho w far do es the p article tra vel as view ed from the p article ’s ref erenc e frame?
5.5The L orentz Transf ormation
Learning Objectiv es
•Describe the Galilean tr ansf ormation o f classical mechanics , relating the position, time, v elocities , and
acceler ations measur ed in dif ferent iner tial fr ames
•Deriv e the corr esponding L orentz transf ormation equations , which, in contr ast to the Galilean
transf ormation, ar e consis tent with special r elativit y
•Explain the L orentz transf ormation and many o f the f eatur es of relativit y in terms o f four-dimensional space -
time
We ha ve use d the p ostula tes o f rela tivity to e xamine , in p articular e xamples , how obser vers in diff erent frames
of ref erenc e me asure diff erent v alues f or lengths and the time inter vals. We can g ain fur ther insight into ho w
the p ostula tes o f rela tivity chang e the N ewtonian view o f time and sp ace by examining the trans forma tion
equa tions tha t giv e the sp ace and time c oordina tes o f events in one iner tial ref erenc e frame in terms o f those
in another . We firs t examine ho w position and time c oordina tes trans form b etween iner tial frames ac cording
to the view in N ewtonian ph ysics . Then w e examine ho w this has to b e chang ed to a gree with the p ostula tes o f
rela tivity . Finally , we examine the resulting Lorentz trans forma tion e qua tions and some o f their c onse quenc es
in terms o f four-dimensional sp ace-time dia grams , to supp ort the view tha t the c onse quenc es o f special
rela tivity result from the prop erties o f time and sp ace itself, ra ther than electroma gnetism .
The Galilean T ransf ormation Equations
Anevent is sp ecifie d by its lo cation and time ( x,y,z,t) rela tive to one p articular iner tial frame o f ref erenc eS.
As an e xample , (x,y,z,t) could denote the p osition o f a p article a t time t, and w e could b e looking a t these
positions f or man y diff erent times to f ollow the motion o f the p article . Supp ose a sec ond frame o f ref erenc e
moves with v elocity vwith resp ect to the firs t. For simplicity , assume this rela tive velocity is along the x-axis .
The rela tion b etween the time and c oordina tes in the tw o frames o f ref erenc e is then5.5 • The L orentz Transf ormation 199

Implicit in these e qua tions is the as sumption tha t time me asurements made b y obser vers in b oth Sand are
the same . Tha t is,
These f our e qua tions are kno wn c ollectiv ely as the Galile an trans format ion.
We can obtain the G alile an v elocity and ac celera tion trans forma tion e qua tions b y diff erentia ting these
equa tions with resp ect to time . We use ufor the v elocity o f a p article throughout this chapter to dis tinguish it
from v, the rela tive velocity o f two ref erenc e frames . Note tha t, for the G alile an trans forma tion , the increment
of time use d in diff erentia ting to c alcula te the p article v elocity is the same in b oth frames ,
Differentia tion yields
and
We denote the v elocity o f the p article b yurather than vto avoid c onfusion with the v elocity vof one frame o f
referenc e with resp ect to the other . Velocities in e ach frame diff er b y the v elocity tha t one frame has as seen
from the other frame . Obser vers in b oth frames o f ref erenc e me asure the same v alue o f the ac celera tion .
Because the mas s is unchang ed by the trans forma tion , and dis tanc es b etween p oints are uncharg ed,
obser vers in b oth frames see the same f orces acting b etween objects and the same f orm o f Newton ’s
second and third la ws in all iner tial frames . The la ws of mechanics are c onsis tent with the firs t postula te of
rela tivity .
The L orentz Transf ormation Equations
The G alile an trans forma tion nev ertheles s viola tes Eins tein ’s postula tes, because the v elocity e qua tions s tate
that a pulse o f light mo ving with sp eedcalong the x-axis w ould tra vel at speed in the other iner tial frame .
Specific ally, the spheric al pulse has radius at time tin the unprime d frame , and also has radius
at time in the prime d frame . Expres sing these rela tions in C artesian c oordina tes giv es
The left -hand sides o f the tw o expres sions c an b e set e qual b ecause b oth are z ero. Bec ause and
we obtain
This c annot b e sa tisfied for nonz ero rela tive velocity vof the tw o frames if w e as sume the G alile an
trans forma tion results in with
To find the c orrect set o f trans forma tion e qua tions , assume the tw o coordina te systems Sand inFigure
5.13 . First supp ose tha t an ev ent o ccurs a t in and a t inS, as depicte d in the figure .5.5200 5 • Relativit y
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Figur e5.13 An e vent oc curs at ( x, 0, 0, t) inSand at in The L orentz tr ansformation equations r elate events in the tw o
systems .
Supp ose tha t at the ins tant tha t the origins o f the c oordina te systems in Sand coincide , a flash bulb emits a
spheric ally spre ading pulse o f light s tarting from the origin . At time t, an obser ver in Sfinds the origin o f to
be at With the help o f a friend in , the Sobser ver also me asures the dis tanc e from the ev ent to the
origin o f and finds it to b e This f ollows because w e ha ve alre ady sho wn the p ostula tes o f
rela tivity to imply length c ontraction . Thus the p osition o f the ev ent in Sis
and
The p ostula tes o f rela tivity imply tha t the e qua tion rela ting dis tanc e and time o f the spheric al w ave front:
mus t apply b oth in terms o f prime d and unprime d coordina tes, which w as sho wn a bove to le ad to Equa tion
5.5:
We combine this with the e qua tion rela ting xand to obtain the rela tion b etween tand
The e qua tions rela ting the time and p osition o f the ev ents as seen in Sare then
This set o f equa tions , rela ting the p osition and time in the tw o iner tial frames , is kno wn as the Lorentz
trans format ion. The y are name d in honor o f H.A. Lorentz (1853–1928), who firs t prop osed them .
Interes tingly , he jus tifie d the trans forma tion on wha t was ev entually disc overed to b e a fallacious h ypothesis .
The c orrect theoretic al basis is Eins tein ’s sp ecial theor y of rela tivity .
The rev erse trans forma tion e xpres ses the v aria bles in Sin terms o f those in Simply interchanging the
prime d and unprime d varia bles and subs tituting giv es:5.5 • The L orentz Transf ormation 201

EXAMPLE 5.6
Using the L orentz T ransforma tion f or Time
Spacecra ft is at res t, eventually he ading to ward A lpha C enta uri, when S pacecra ftSpasses it a t rela tive
speedc/2. The c aptain o f sends a radio signal tha t las ts 1.2 s ac cording to tha t ship ’s clo ck. Use the Lorentz
trans forma tion to find the time inter val of the signal me asure d by the c ommunic ations o fficer o f spaceship S.
Solution
a.Identif y the kno wn:
b.Identif y the unkno wn:
c.Expres s the ans wer as an e qua tion . The time signal s tarts as and s tops a t Note tha t the
coordina te of both ev ents is the same b ecause the clo ck is a t res t in Write the firs t Lorentz
trans forma tion e qua tion in terms o f and similarly f or the prime d coordina tes,
as:
Because the p osition o f the clo ck in is fix ed, and the time inter val becomes:
d.Do the c alcula tion .
With this giv es:
Note tha t the Lorentz trans forma tion repro duces the time dila tion e qua tion .
EXAMPLE 5.7
Using the L orentz T ransforma tion f or Length
A sur veyor me asures a s treet to b e long in Ear th frame S. U se the Lorentz trans forma tion to obtain
an e xpres sion f or its length me asure d from a sp aceship moving b y at speed 0.20 c, assuming the x
coordina tes o f the tw o frames c oincide a t time
Solution
a.Identif y the kno wn:
b.Identif y the unkno wn:
c.Expres s the ans wer as an e qua tion . The sur veyor in frame S has me asure d the tw o ends o f the s tick
simultaneously , and f ound them a t res t at and a dis tanc e apart. The sp aceship
crew me asures the simultaneous lo cation o f the ends o f the s ticks in their frame . To rela te the lengths
recorde d by obser vers in and S, resp ectiv ely, write the sec ond o f the f our Lorentz trans forma tion202 5 • Relativit y
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

equa tions as:
d.Do the c alcula tion . Bec ause the length o f the mo ving s tick is e qual to:
Note tha t the Lorentz trans forma tion g ave the length c ontraction e qua tion f or the s treet .
EXAMPLE 5.8
Lorentz T ransforma tion and Simul taneity
The obser ver sho wn in Figure 5.14 standing b y the railro ad tracks sees the tw o bulbs flash simultaneously a t
both ends o f the 26 m long p asseng er car when the middle o f the c ar p asses him a t a sp eed ofc/2. F ind the
separation in time b etween when the bulbs flashe d as seen b y the train p asseng er se ated in the middle o f the
car.
Figur e5.14 An person w atching a tr ain g o by obser ves tw o bulbs flash simul taneousl y at opposit e ends o f a pas seng er car . Ther e is
another pas seng er inside o f the car obser ving the same flashes but fr om a diff erent perspectiv e.
Solution
a.Identif y the kno wn:
Note tha t the sp atial sep aration o f the tw o ev ents is b etween the tw o lamps , not the dis tanc e of the lamp to
the p asseng er.
b.Identif y the unkno wn:
Again, note tha t the time inter val is b etween the flashes o f the lamps , not b etween arriv al times f or
reaching the p asseng er.
c.Expres s the ans wer as an e qua tion:
d.Do the c alcula tion:5.5 • The L orentz Transf ormation 203

Significanc e
The sign indic ates tha t the ev ent with the larg er namely , the flash from the right , is seen to o ccur firs t in
the frame , as f ound e arlier f or this e xample , so tha t
Space -time
Relativis tic phenomena c an b e analyz ed in terms o f events in a f our-dimensional space-time . When
phenomena such as the twin p arado x, time dila tion , length c ontraction , and the dep endenc e of simultaneity
on rela tive motion are view ed in this w ay, the y are seen to b e characteris tic o f the na ture o f space and time ,
rather than sp ecific asp ects o f electroma gnetism .
In three -dimensional sp ace, positions are sp ecifie d by three c oordina tes on a set o f Cartesian ax es, and the
displac ement o f one p oint from another is giv en b y:
The dis tanc e between the p oints is
The dis tanc e is in variant under a rota tion o f axes. If a new set o f Cartesian ax es rota ted around the origin
rela tive to the original ax es are use d, each p oint in sp ace will ha ve new c oordina tes in terms o f the new ax es,
but the dis tanc e given b y
Tha t has the same v alue tha t had . Something similar happ ens with the Lorentz trans forma tion in sp ace-
time .
Define the sep aration b etween tw o ev ents , each giv en b y a set o fx,y,z¸and ctalong a f our-dimensional
Cartesian s ystem o f axes in sp ace-time , as
Also define the sp ace-time inter val between the tw o ev ents as
If the tw o ev ents ha ve the same v alue o fctin the frame o f ref erenc e considere d, would c orresp ond to the
distanc e between p oints in sp ace.
The p ath o f a p article through sp ace-time c onsis ts of the ev ents ( x,y,z¸ ct ) specifying a lo cation a t each time o f
its motion . The p ath through sp ace-time is c alled the world line of the p article . The w orld line o f a p article tha t
remains a t res t at the same lo cation is a s traight line tha t is p arallel to the time axis . If the p article mo ves a t
constant v elocity p arallel to the x-axis , its w orld line w ould b e a slop ed line corresp onding to a simple
displac ement vs . time graph . If the p article ac celera tes, its w orld line is cur ved. The increment o fsalong the
world line o f the p article is giv en in diff erential f orm as
Just as the dis tanc e is in variant under rota tion o f the sp ace ax es, the sp ace-time inter val:
is in variant under the Lorentz trans forma tion . This f ollows from the p ostula tes o f rela tivity , and c an b e seen
also b y subs titution o f the previous Lorentz trans forma tion e qua tions into the e xpres sion f or the sp ace-time
inter val:204 5 • Relativit y
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

In addition , the Lorentz trans forma tion chang es the c oordina tes o f an ev ent in time and sp ace similarly to ho w
a three -dimensional rota tion chang es old c oordina tes into new c oordina tes:
where
Lorentz trans forma tions c an b e reg arde d as g eneraliza tions o f spatial rota tions to sp ace-time . Ho wever, there
are some diff erenc es b etween a three -dimensional axis rota tion and a Lorentz trans forma tion in volving the
time axis , because o f diff erenc es in ho w the metric , or r ule f or me asuring the displac ements and differ.
Although is in variant under sp atial rota tions and is in variant also under Lorentz trans forma tion , the
Lorentz trans forma tion in volving the time axis do es not preser ve some f eatures , such as the ax es remaining
perpendicular or the length sc ale along e ach axis remaining the same .
Note tha t the quantity can ha ve either sign , dep ending on the c oordina tes o f the sp ace-time ev ents
involved. For p airs o f events tha t giv e it a neg ative sign , it is useful to define as The signific ance
of as jus t define d follows by noting tha t in a frame o f ref erenc e where the tw o ev ents o ccur a t the same
location , we ha ve and theref ore (from the e qua tion f or
Theref ore is the time inter val in the frame o f ref erenc e where b oth ev ents o ccur a t the same
location . It is the same inter val of prop er time discus sed earlier . It also f ollows from the rela tion b etween
and tha t that because is Lorentz in variant , the prop er time is also Lorentz in variant . All obser vers in
all iner tial frames a gree on the prop er time inter vals b etween the same tw o ev ents .
CHE CK Y OUR UNDER STANDING 5.5
Sho w tha t if a time increment dtelapses f or an obser ver who sees the p article mo ving with v elocity v, it
corresp onds to a prop er time p article increment f or the p article o f
The light cone
We can de al with the difficulty o f visualizing and sk etching graphs in f our dimensions b y ima gining the three
spatial c oordina tes to b e represente d collectiv ely b y a horiz ontal axis , and the v ertical axis to b e the ct-axis .
Star ting with a p articular ev ent in sp ace-time as the origin o f the sp ace-time graph sho wn, the w orld line o f a
particle tha t remains a t res t at the initial lo cation o f the ev ent a t the origin then is the time axis . An y plane
through the time axis p arallel to the sp atial ax es c ontains all the ev ents tha t are simultaneous with e ach other
and with the intersection o f the plane and the time axis , as seen in the res t frame o f the ev ent a t the origin .
It is useful to picture a light c one on the graph , forme d by the w orld lines o f all light b eams p assing through the
origin ev ent A, as sho wn in Figure 5.15 . The light c one, according to the p ostula tes o f rela tivity , has sides a t an
angle o f if the time axis is me asure d in units o fct, and , according to the p ostula tes o f rela tivity , the light
cone remains the same in all iner tial frames . Bec ause the ev ent Ais arbitrar y, every point in the sp ace-time
diagram has a light c one as sociated with it .5.5 • The L orentz Transf ormation 205

Figur e5.15 The light c one c onsis ts of all the w orld lines f ollowed b y light fr om the e ventAat the v ertex of the c one.
Consider no w the w orld line o f a p article through sp ace-time . An y world line outside o f the c one, such as one
passing from Athrough C, would in volve sp eeds gre ater than c, and w ould theref ore not b e possible . Events
such as Cthat lie outside the light c one are said to ha ve a sp ace-like sep aration from ev ent A. The y are
characteriz ed in one dimension b y:
An ev ent lik eBthat lies in the upp er cone is re acha ble without e xceeding the sp eed of light in v acuum , and is
characteriz ed in one dimension b y
The ev ent is said to ha ve a time -like sep aration from A. Time -like ev ents tha t fall into the upp er half o f the light
cone o ccur a t gre ater v alues o ftthan the time o f the ev ent Aat the v ertex and are in the future rela tive to A.
Events tha t ha ve time -like sep aration from A and fall in the lo wer half o f the light c one are in the p ast, and c an
affect the ev ent a t the origin . The region outside the light c one is la beled as neither p ast nor future , but ra ther
as “elsewhere .”
For an y ev ent tha t has a sp ace-like sep aration from the ev ent a t the origin , it is p ossible to cho ose a time axis
that will mak e the tw o ev ents o ccur a t the same time , so tha t the tw o ev ents are simultaneous in some frame o f
referenc e. Theref ore, which o f the ev ents with sp ace-like sep aration c omes b efore the other in time also
dep ends on the frame o f ref erenc e of the obser ver. Sinc e sp ace-like sep arations c an b e tra verse d only b y
exceeding the sp eed of light; this viola tion o f which ev ent c an c ause the other pro vides another argument f or
why particles c annot tra vel fas ter than the sp eed of light , as w ell as p otential ma terial f or scienc e fiction a bout
time tra vel. Similarly f or an y ev ent with time -like sep aration from the ev ent a t the origin , a frame o f ref erenc e
can b e found tha t will mak e the ev ents o ccur a t the same lo cation . Bec ause the rela tions
and
are Lorentz in variant , whether tw o ev ents are time -like and c an b e made to o ccur a t the same plac e or sp ace-
like and c an b e made to o ccur a t the same time is the same f or all obser vers. All obser vers in diff erent iner tial
frames o f ref erenc e agree on whether tw o ev ents ha ve a time -like or sp ace-like sep aration .
The t win par adox seen in space -time
The twin p arado xdiscus sed earlier in volves an as trona ut twin tra veling a t ne ar light sp eed to a dis tant s tar206 5 • Relativit y
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

system , and returning to Ear th. Bec ause o f time dila tion , the sp ace twin is pre dicte d to a ge much les s than the
earthbound twin . This seems p arado xical because w e might ha ve expecte d at firs t glanc e for the rela tive
motion to b e symmetric al and naiv ely thought it p ossible to also argue tha t the e arthbound twin should a ge
less.
To analyz e this in terms o f a sp ace-time dia gram , assume tha t the origin o f the ax es use d is fix ed in Ear th. The
world line o f the e arthbound twin is then along the time axis .
The w orld line o f the as trona ut twin , who tra vels to the dis tant s tar and then returns , mus t devia te from a
straight line p ath in order to allo w a return trip . As seen in Figure 5.16 , the circums tanc es o f the tw o twins are
not a t all s ymmetric al. Their p aths in sp ace-time are o f manif estly diff erent length . Specific ally, the w orld line
of the e arthbound twin has length which then giv es the prop er time tha t elapses f or the e arthbound twin
as The dis tanc e to the dis tant s tar s ystem is The prop er time tha t elapses f or the sp ace twin is
where
This is c onsidera bly shor ter than the prop er time f or the e arthbound twin b y the ra tio
consis tent with the time dila tion f ormula. The twin p arado x is theref ore seen to b e no p arado x at all . The
situa tion o f the tw o twins is not s ymmetric al in the sp ace-time dia gram . The only surprise is p erhaps tha t the
seemingly long er p ath on the sp ace-time dia gram c orresp onds to the smaller prop er time inter val, because o f
how and dep end on and
Figur e5.16 The spac e twin and the ear thbound twin, in the twin par adox example , follow world lines o f diff erent length thr ough spac e-
time .
Lorentz transf ormations in space -time
We ha ve alre ady note d ho w the Lorentz trans forma tion le aves
unchang ed and c orresp onds to a rota tion o f axes in the f our-dimensional sp ace-time . If the S and frames
are in rela tive motion along their share dx-direction the sp ace and time ax es o f are rota ted by an angle as
seen from S, in the w ay sho wn in sho wn in Figure 5.17 , where:
This diff ers from a rota tion in the usual three -dimension sense , inso far as the tw o sp ace-time ax es rota te
toward e ach other s ymmetric ally in a scis sors -like way, as sho wn. The rota tion o f the time and sp ace ax es are
both through the same angle . The mesh o f dashe d lines p arallel to the tw o ax es sho w ho w coordina tes o f an
event w ould b e re ad along the prime d ax es. This w ould b e done b y following a line p arallel to the and one
parallel to the -axis , as sho wn b y the dashe d lines . The length sc ale o f both ax es are chang ed by:5.5 • The L orentz Transf ormation 207

The line la beled at to the x-axis c orresp onds to the e dge of the light c one, and is una ffecte d by the
Lorentz trans forma tion , in ac cordanc e with the sec ond p ostula te of rela tivity . The line , and the light
cone it represents , are the same f or b oth the Sand frame o f ref erenc e.
Figur e5.17 The L orentz tr ansformation r esul ts in ne w spac e and time ax es rotat ed in a scis sors -like way with r espect t o the original ax es.
Simultaneit y
Simultaneity of events a t sep arated locations dep ends on the frame o f ref erenc e use d to describ e them , as
given b y the scis sors -like “rota tion ” to new time and sp ace coordina tes as describ ed. If tw o ev ents ha ve the
same tvalues in the unprime d frame o f ref erenc e, the y nee d not ha ve the same v alues me asure d along the
and w ould then not b e simultaneous in the prime d frame .
As a sp ecific e xample , consider the ne ar-light -speed train in which flash lamps a t the tw o ends o f the c ar ha ve
flashe d simultaneously in the frame o f ref erenc e of an obser ver on the ground . The sp ace-time graph is sho wn
Figure 5.18 . The flashes o f the tw o lamps are represente d by the dots la beled “Left flash lamp ” and “Right flash
lamp ” tha t lie on the light c one in the p ast. The w orld line o f both pulses tra vel along the e dge of the light c one
to arriv e at the obser ver on the ground simultaneously . Their arriv al is the ev ent a t the origin . The y theref ore
had to b e emit ted simultaneously in the unprime d frame , as represente d by the p oint la beled as t(both). B ut
time is me asure d along the in the frame o f ref erenc e of the obser ver se ated in the middle o f the train
car. So in her frame o f ref erenc e, the emis sion ev ent o f the bulbs la beled as (left) and (right) w ere not
simultaneous .208 5 • Relativit y
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Figur e5.18 The tr ain e xample r evisit ed. The flashes oc cur at the same time t(both) along the time axis o f the gr ound obser ver, but at
different times , along the time axis o f the pas seng er.
In terms o f the sp ace-time dia gram , the tw o obser vers are merely using diff erent time ax es for the same ev ents
because the y are in diff erent iner tial frames , and the c onclusions o f both obser vers are e qually v alid . As the
analy sis in terms o f the sp ace-time dia grams fur ther sugg ests, the prop erty of ho w simultaneity o f events
dep ends on the frame o f ref erenc e results from the prop erties o f space and time itself, ra ther than from
anything sp ecific ally a bout electroma gnetism .
5.6Relativis tic V elocit y Transf ormation
Learning Objectiv es
By the end o f this section, y ou wil l be able t o:
•Deriv e the equations consis tent with special r elativit y for transf orming v elocities in one iner tial fr ame o f
reference into ano ther.
•Apply the v elocit y transf ormation equations to objec ts mo ving at r elativis tic speeds .
•Examine ho w the combined v elocities pr edicted b y the r elativis tic tr ansf ormation equations compar e with
those e xpec ted classically .
Remaining in plac e in a ka yak in a fas t-mo ving riv er tak es eff ort. The riv er current pulls the ka yak along .
Trying to p addle a gains t the flo w can mo ve the ka yak ups tream rela tive to the w ater, but tha t only ac counts f or
part of its v elocity rela tive to the shore . The ka yak’s motion is an e xample o f ho w velocities in N ewtonian
mechanics c ombine b y vector addition . The ka yak’s velocity is the v ector sum o f its v elocity rela tive to the
water and the w ater’s velocity rela tive to the riv erbank . Ho wever, the rela tivis tic addition o f velocities is quite
different .
Velocit y Transf ormations
Ima gine a c ar tra veling a t night along a s traight ro ad, as in Figure 5.19 . The driv er sees the light le aving the
headlights a t speedcwithin the c ar’s frame o f ref erenc e. If the G alile an trans forma tion applie d to light , then
the light from the c ar’s he adlights w ould appro ach the p edestrian a t a sp eed contrar y to Eins tein ’s5.6 • Relativis tic V elocit y Transf ormation 209

postula tes.
Figur e5.19 According t o experimental r esul ts and the sec ond pos tulat e of relativity , light fr om the car ’s headlights mo ves a way from the
car at speed cand t oward the obser ver on the side walk at speed c.
Both the dis tanc e tra veled and the time o f tra vel are diff erent in the tw o frames o f ref erenc e, and the y mus t
differ in a w ay tha t mak es the sp eed of light the same in all iner tial frames . The c orrect r ules f or trans forming
velocities from one frame to another c an b e obtaine d from the Lorentz trans forma tion e qua tions .
Relativis tic Transf ormation o f Velocit y
Supp ose an object Pis mo ving a t constant v elocity as me asure d in the frame . The frame
is mo ving along its at velocity v. In an increment o f time , the p article is displac ed by along the
Applying the Lorentz trans forma tion e qua tions giv es the c orresp onding increments o f time and
displac ement in the unprime d ax es:
The v elocity c omp onents o f the p article seen in the unprime d coordina te system are then
We thus obtain the e qua tions f or the v elocity c omp onents o f the object as seen in frame S:210 5 • Relativit y
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Comp are this with ho w the G alile an trans forma tion o f clas sical mechanics sa ys the v elocities trans form , by
adding simply as v ectors:
When the rela tive velocity o f the frames is much smaller than the sp eed of light , tha t is, when the
special rela tivity v elocity addition la w re duces to the G alile an v elocity la w. When the sp eedvof rela tive to S
is comp arable to the sp eed of light , the relat ivistic velocity addit ion law giv es a much smaller result than the
clas sical (G alile an) v elocity addit ion does.
EXAMPLE 5.9
Velocity T ransforma tion E quations f or Light
Supp ose a sp aceship he ading directly to ward Ear th a t half the sp eed of light sends a signal to us on a laser -
produced beam o f light ( Figure 5.20 ). Giv en tha t the light le aves the ship a t speedcas obser ved from the ship ,
calcula te the sp eed at which it appro aches Ear th.
Figur e5.20 How fas t does a light signal appr oach Ear th if sent fr om a spac eship tr aveling at 0.500 c?
Strategy
Because the light and the sp aceship are mo ving a t rela tivis tic sp eeds, we cannot use simple v elocity addition .
Instead, we determine the sp eed at which the light appro aches Ear th using rela tivis tic v elocity addition .
Solution
a.Identif y the kno wns:
b.Identif y the unkno wn: u.
c.Expres s the ans wer as an e qua tion:
d.Do the c alcula tion:
Significanc e
Relativis tic v elocity addition giv es the c orrect result . Light le aves the ship a t speedcand appro aches Ear th a t
speedc. The sp eed of light is indep endent o f the rela tive motion o f sourc e and obser ver, whether the obser ver
is on the ship or e arthbound .
Velocities c annot add to gre ater than the sp eed of light , pro vide d tha tvis les s than cand does not e xceedc.
The f ollowing e xample illus trates tha t rela tivis tic v elocity addition is not as s ymmetric as clas sical velocity5.6 • Relativis tic V elocit y Transf ormation 211

addition .
EXAMPLE 5.10
Relativis tic P ackag e Deliv ery
Supp ose the sp aceship in the previous e xample appro aches Ear th a t half the sp eed of light and sho ots a
canis ter a t a sp eed of 0.750 c(Figure 5.21 ). (a) A t wha t velocity do es an e arthbound obser ver see the c anis ter if
it is shot directly to ward Ear th? ( b) If it is shot directly a way from Ear th?
Figur e5.21 A canis ter is fir ed at 0.7500 ctoward Ear th or a way from Ear th.
Strategy
Because the c anis ter and the sp aceship are mo ving a t rela tivis tic sp eeds, we mus t determine the sp eed of the
canis ter b y an e arthbound obser ver using rela tivis tic v elocity addition ins tead o f simple v elocity addition .
Solution f or (a)
a.Identif y the kno wns:
b.Identif y the unkno wn: u.
c.Expres s the ans wer as an e qua tion:
d.Do the c alcula tion:
Solution f or (b)
a.Identif y the kno wns:
b.Identif y the unkno wn: u.
c.Expres s the ans wer as an e qua tion:
d.Do the c alcula tion:
Significanc e
The minus sign indic ates a v elocity a way from Ear th (in the opp osite direction from v), which me ans the212 5 • Relativit y
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

canis ter is he ading to ward Ear th in p art (a) and a way in p art (b), as e xpecte d. But rela tivis tic v elocities do not
add as simply as the y do clas sically. In p art (a), the c anis ter do es appro ach Ear th fas ter, but a t les s than the
vector sum o f the v elocities , which w ould giv e 1.250 c. In p art (b), the c anis ter mo ves a way from Ear th a t a
velocity o f which is fasterthan the −0.250 cexpecte d clas sically. The diff erenc es in v elocities are not
even s ymmetric: In p art (a), an obser ver on Ear th sees the c anis ter and the ship mo ving ap art at a sp eed of
0.409 c, and a t a sp eed of 0.900 cin p art (b).
CHE CK Y OUR UNDER STANDING 5.6
Distanc es along a direction p erpendicular to the rela tive motion o f the tw o frames are the same in b oth frames .
Why then are v elocities p erpendicular to the x-direction diff erent in the tw o frames?
5.7Doppler Ef fect for Light
Learning Objectiv es
By the end o f this section, y ou wil l be able t o:
•Explain the origin o f the shif t in fr equency and w avelength o f the obser ved w avelength when obser ver and
sour ce mo ved to ward or aw ay fr om each o ther
•Deriv e an e xpression f or the r elativis tic Doppler shif t
•Apply the Doppler shif t equations to r eal-w orld e xamples
As discus sed in the chapter on sound , if a sourc e of sound and a lis tener are mo ving far ther ap art, the lis tener
encounters f ewer cy cles o f a w ave in e ach sec ond , and theref ore lo wer fre quency , than if their sep aration
remains c onstant . For the same re ason , the lis tener detects a higher fre quency if the sourc e and lis tener are
getting closer . The resulting Doppler shift in detecte d fre quency o ccurs f or an y form o f wave. For sound w aves,
however, the e qua tions f or the Doppler shift diff er mark edly dep ending on whether it is the sourc e, the
obser ver, or the air , which is mo ving . Light re quires no me dium , and the Doppler shift f or light tra veling in
vacuum dep ends only on the rela tive sp eed of the obser ver and sourc e.
The Relativis tic Doppler Ef fect
Supp ose an obser ver in Ssees light from a sourc e in moving a way at velocity v(Figure 5.22 ). The
wavelength o f the light c ould b e me asure d within —for e xample , by using a mirror to set up s tanding w aves
and me asuring the dis tanc e between no des. These dis tanc es are prop er lengths with as their res t frame ,
and chang e by a factor when me asure d in the obser ver’s frame S, where the r uler me asuring the
wavelength in is seen as mo ving .5.7 • Doppler Ef fect for Light 213

Figur e5.22 (a) When a light w ave is emit ted b y a sour ce fix ed in the mo ving iner tial fr ame the obser ver in Ssees the w avelength
measur ed in to be shor ter by a fact or (b) Because the obser ver sees the sour ce mo ving a way within S, the w ave pat tern
reaching the obser ver in Sis also s tretched b y the fact or
If the sourc e were s tationar y in S, the obser ver w ould see a length of the w ave pattern in time But
because o f the motion o f rela tive to S, considere d solely within S, the obser ver sees the w ave pattern , and
theref ore the w avelength , stretche d out b y a factor o f
as illus trated in ( b) ofFigure 5.22 . The o verall incre ase from b oth eff ects giv es
where is the w avelength o f the light seen b y the sourc e in and is the w avelength tha t the obser ver
detects within S.
Red Shif ts and Blue Shif ts
The obser ved wavelength of electroma gnetic radia tion is long er (c alled a “re d shift ”) than tha t emit ted by
the sourc e when the sourc e mo ves a way from the obser ver. Similarly , the w avelength is shor ter (c alled a “blue
shift ”) when the sourc e mo ves to ward the obser ver. The amount o f chang e is determine d by
where is the w avelength in the frame o f ref erenc e of the sourc e, and vis the rela tive velocity o f the tw o
frames Sand The v elocity vis positiv e for motion a way from an obser ver and neg ative for motion to ward an
obser ver. In terms o f sourc e fre quency and obser ved fre quency , this e qua tion c an b e writ ten as214 5 • Relativit y
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Notice tha t the signs are diff erent from those o f the w avelength e qua tion .
EXAMPLE 5.11
Calcula ting a Doppler Shift
Supp ose a g alaxy is mo ving a way from Ear th a t a sp eed 0.825 c. It emits radio w aves with a w avelength o f
0.525 m . Wha t wavelength w ould w e detect on Ear th?
Strategy
Because the g alaxy is mo ving a t a rela tivis tic sp eed, we mus t determine the Doppler shift o f the radio w aves
using the rela tivis tic Doppler shift ins tead o f the clas sical Doppler shift .
Solution
a.Identif y the kno wns:
b.Identif y the unkno wn:
c.Expres s the ans wer as an e qua tion:
d.Do the c alcula tion:
Significanc e
Because the g alaxy is mo ving a way from Ear th, we expect the w avelengths o f radia tion it emits to b e
redshifte d. The w avelength w e calcula ted is 1.70 m , which is re dshifte d from the original w avelength o f 0.525
m. You will see in Particle Ph ysics and C osmolog ythat detecting re dshifte d radia tion le d to present -day
unders tanding o f the origin and ev olution o f the univ erse .
CHE CK Y OUR UNDER STANDING 5.7
Supp ose a sp ace prob e mo ves a way from Ear th a t a sp eed 0.350 c. It sends a radio -wave mes sage back to Ear th
at a fre quency o f 1.50 GHz. A t wha t fre quency is the mes sage rec eived on Ear th?
The rela tivis tic Doppler eff ect has applic ations ranging from Doppler radar s torm monitoring to pro viding
informa tion on the motion and dis tanc e of stars . We describ e some o f these applic ations in the e xercises .5.7 • Doppler Ef fect for Light 215

5.8Relativis tic Momentum
Learning Objectiv es
By the end o f this section, y ou wil l be able t o:
•Define r elativis tic momentum in terms o f mass and v elocit y
•Show ho w relativis tic momentum r elates to classical momentum
•Show ho w conser vation o f relativis tic momentum limits objec ts with mass to speeds less than
Momentum is a c entral c oncept in ph ysics . The bro ades t form o f Newton ’s sec ond la w is s tated in terms o f
momentum . Momentum is c onser ved whenev er the net e xternal f orce on a s ystem is z ero. This mak es
momentum c onser vation a fundamental to ol for analyzing c ollisions ( Figure 5.23 ). Much o f wha t we kno w
about sub atomic s tructure c omes from the analy sis o f collisions o f accelera tor-pro duced rela tivis tic p articles ,
and momentum c onser vation pla ys a cr ucial role in this analy sis.
Figur e5.23 Momentum is an impor tant c oncept for these f ootbal l pla yers fr om the Univ ersity o f Calif ornia at Berk eley and the Univ ersity
of Calif ornia at Da vis. A pla yer with the same v elocity but gr eater mas s collides with gr eater impact because his momentum is gr eater. For
objects mo ving at r elativis tic speeds , the eff ect is e ven gr eater.
The firs t postula te of rela tivity s tates tha t the la ws of ph ysics are the same in all iner tial frames . Do es the la w of
conser vation o f momentum sur vive this re quirement a t high v elocities? It c an b e sho wn tha t the momentum
calcula ted as merely even if it is c onser ved in one frame o f ref erenc e, ma y not b e conser ved in
another a fter applying the Lorentz trans forma tion to the v elocities . The c orrect e qua tion f or momentum c an
be sho wn, ins tead, to b e the clas sical expres sion in terms o f the increment of prop er time o f the p article ,
obser ved in the p article ’s res t frame:
Relativis tic Momentum
Relat ivistic momentum is clas sical momentum multiplie d by the rela tivis tic factor γ:
5.6216 5 • Relativit y
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Note tha t we use ufor v elocity here to dis tinguish it from rela tive velocity vbetween obser vers. The factor
that occurs here has the same f orm as the previous rela tivis tic factor except tha t it is no w in terms o f the
velocity o f the p article uinstead o f the rela tive velocity vof two frames o f ref erenc e.
Withpexpres sed in this w ay, total momentum is conser ved whenev er the net e xternal f orce is z ero, jus t as
in clas sical ph ysics . Again w e see tha t the rela tivis tic quantity b ecomes vir tually the same as the clas sical
quantity a t low velocities , where u/cis small and is very ne arly e qual to 1. R elativis tic momentum has the
same intuitiv e role as clas sical momentum . It is gre atest for larg e mas ses mo ving a t high v elocities , but
because o f the factor rela tivis tic momentum appro aches infinity as uappro aches c(Figure 5.24 ). This is
another indic ation tha t an object with mas s cannot re ach the sp eed of light . If it did , its momentum w ould
become infinite —an unre asona ble v alue .
Figur e5.24 Relativis tic momentum appr oaches infinity as the v elocity o f an object appr oaches the speed o f light.
The rela tivis tically c orrect definition o f momentum as is sometimes tak en to imply tha t mas s varies
with v elocity: particularly in older te xtbooks. Ho wever, note tha tmis the mas s of the object as
measure d by a p erson a t res t rela tive to the object . Thus ,mis define d to b e the res t mas s, which c ould b e
measure d at res t, perhaps using gra vity. When a mas s is mo ving rela tive to an obser ver, the only w ay tha t its
mas s can b e determine d is through c ollisions or other me ans in volving momentum . Bec ause the mas s of a
moving object c annot b e determine d indep endently o f momentum , the only me aningful mas s is res t mas s.
Theref ore, when w e use the term “mas s,” assume it to b e identic al to “res t mas s.”
Relativis tic momentum is define d in such a w ay tha t conser vation o f momentum holds in all iner tial frames .
Whenev er the net e xternal f orce on a s ystem is z ero, rela tivis tic momentum is c onser ved, jus t as is the c ase f or
clas sical momentum . This has b een v erifie d in numerous e xperiments .
CHE CK Y OUR UNDER STANDING 5.8
Wha t is the momentum o f an electron tra veling a t a sp eed 0.985 c? The res t mas s of the electron iswhere mis the rest mas sof the object ,is its v elocity rela tive to an obser ver, and γ is the rela tivis tic
factor:
5.75.8 • Relativis tic Momentum 217

5.9Relativis tic Ener gy
Learning Objectiv es
By the end o f this section, y ou wil l be able t o:
•Explain ho w the w ork-ener gy theor em leads to an e xpression f or the r elativis tic kine tic ener gy o f an objec t
•Show ho w the r elativis tic ener gy relates to the classical kine tic ener gy, and se ts a limit on the speed o f any
objec t with mass
•Describe ho w the to tal ener gy o f a par ticle is r elated to its mass and v elocit y
•Explain ho w relativit y relates to ener gy-mass equiv alence, and some o f the pr actical implications o f ener gy-
mass equiv alence
The tokamak in Figure 5.25 is a f orm o f experimental fusion re actor , which c an chang e mas s to energ y.
Nucle ar re actors are pro of of the rela tionship b etween energ y and ma tter.
Conser vation o f energ y is one o f the mos t imp ortant la ws in ph ysics . Not only do es energ y ha ve man y
imp ortant f orms , but e ach f orm c an b e converted to an y other . We kno w tha t clas sically, the total amount o f
energ y in a s ystem remains c onstant . Relativis tically, energ y is s till c onser ved, but energ y-mas s equiv alenc e
mus t no w be tak en into ac count , for e xample , in the re actions tha t occur within a nucle ar re actor . Relativis tic
energ y is intentionally define d so tha t it is c onser ved in all iner tial frames , jus t as is the c ase f or rela tivis tic
momentum . As a c onse quenc e, sev eral fundamental quantities are rela ted in w ays not kno wn in clas sical
physics . All of these rela tionships ha ve been v erifie d by experimental results and ha ve fundamental
conse quenc es. The altere d definition o f energ y contains some o f the mos t fundamental and sp ectacular new
insights into na ture in rec ent his tory.
Figur e5.25 The National Spherical T orus Experiment (NS TX) is a fusion r eact or in which h ydrogen isot opes under go fusion t o produc e
helium. In this pr ocess, a relativ ely smal l mas s of fuel is c onverted int o a lar ge amount o f ener gy. (credit: P rinceton Plasma Ph ysics
Labor atory)
Kine tic Ener gy and the Ultimate Speed Limit
The firs t postula te of rela tivity s tates tha t the la ws of ph ysics are the same in all iner tial frames . Eins tein
showed tha t the la w of conser vation o f energ y of a p article is v alid rela tivis tically, but f or energ y expres sed in
terms o f velocity and mas s in a w ay consis tent with rela tivity .
Consider firs t the rela tivis tic e xpres sion f or the kinetic energ y. We again use ufor v elocity to dis tinguish it
from rela tive velocity vbetween obser vers. Clas sically, kinetic energ y is rela ted to mas s and sp eed by the
familiar e xpres sion The c orresp onding rela tivis tic e xpres sion f or kinetic energ y can b e obtaine d
from the w ork-energ y theorem . This theorem s tates tha t the net w ork on a s ystem g oes into kinetic energ y.
Specific ally, if a f orce, expres sed as accelera tes a p article from res t to its final v elocity, the
work done on the p article should b e equal to its final kinetic energ y. In ma thema tical form , for one -218 5 • Relativit y
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

dimensional motion:
Integra te this b y parts to obtain
When an object is motionles s, its sp eed is and
so tha t at res t, as e xpecte d. But the e xpres sion f or rela tivis tic kinetic energ y (such as total energ y and
rest energ y) do es not lo ok much lik e the clas sical To sho w tha t the e xpres sion f or reduces to the
clas sical expres sion f or kinetic energ y at low sp eeds, we use the binomial e xpansion to obtain an
appro xima tion f or valid f or small :
by neglecting the v ery small terms in and higher p owers o fCho osing and leads to the
conclusion tha tγat nonrela tivis tic sp eeds, where is small , satisfies
A binomial e xpansion is a w ay of expres sing an alg ebraic quantity as a sum o f an infinite series o f terms . In
some c ases , as in the limit o f small sp eed here , mos t terms are v ery small . Thus , the e xpres sion deriv ed here
for is not e xact , but it is a v ery ac cura te appro xima tion . Theref ore, at low sp eed:Relativis tic Kine tic Ener gy
Relat ivistic kinet ic ener gyof an y particle o f mas smis
5.85.9 • Relativis tic Ener gy 219

Entering this into the e xpres sion f or rela tivis tic kinetic energ y giv es
Tha t is, rela tivis tic kinetic energ y becomes the same as clas sical kinetic energ y when
It is ev en more interes ting to in vestigate wha t happ ens to kinetic energ y when the sp eed of an object
appro aches the sp eed of light . We kno w tha tbecomes infinite as uappro aches c, so tha t also b ecomes
infinite as the v elocity appro aches the sp eed of light ( Figure 5.26 ). The incre ase in is far larg er than in
asvappro aches c.An infinite amount o f work (and , henc e, an infinite amount o f energ y input) is
require d to ac celera te a mas s to the sp eed of light .
The sp eed of light is the ultima te sp eed limit f or an y particle ha ving mas s. All of this is c onsis tent with the fact
that velocities les s than calways add to les s than c. Both the rela tivis tic f orm f or kinetic energ y and the
ultima te sp eed limit b eing chave been c onfirme d in detail in numerous e xperiments . No ma tter ho w much
energ y is put into ac celera ting a mas s, its v elocity c an only appro ach—not re ach—the sp eed of light .
Figur e5.26 This gr aph o f versus v elocity sho ws ho w kinetic ener gy incr eases without bound as v elocity appr oaches the speed o f
light. Also sho wn is the clas sical kinetic ener gy.
EXAMPLE 5.12
Comparing Kinetic Ener gy
An electron has a v elocity (a) C alcula te the kinetic energ y in Me V of the electron . (b) C omp are this
with the clas sical value f or kinetic energ y at this v elocity. (The mas s of an electron is )
Strategy
The e xpres sion f or rela tivis tic kinetic energ y is alw ays correct , but f or (a), it mus t be use d because the v elocity
is highly rela tivis tic (close to c). First, we calcula te the rela tivis tic factor and then use it to determine the
rela tivis tic kinetic energ y. For (b), w e calcula te the clas sical kinetic energ y (which w ould b e close to the
rela tivis tic v alue if vwere les s than a f ew p ercent o fc) and see tha t it is not the same .The Speed o f Light
No object with mas s can a ttain the speed of light .220 5 • Relativit y
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Solution f or (a)
For p art (a):
a.Identif y the kno wns:
b.Identif y the unkno wn:
c.Expres s the ans wer as an e qua tion: with
d.Do the c alcula tion . First calcula te Keep e xtra digits b ecause this is an interme diate calcula tion:
Now use this v alue to c alcula te the kinetic energ y:
e.Convert units:
Solution f or (b)
For p art (b):
a.List the kno wns:
b.List the unkno wn:
c.Expres s the ans wer as an e qua tion:
d.Do the c alcula tion:
e.Convert units:
Significanc e
As might b e expecte d, because the v elocity is 99.0% o f the sp eed of light , the clas sical kinetic energ y diff ers
signific antly from the c orrect rela tivis tic v alue . Note also tha t the clas sical value is much smaller than the
rela tivis tic v alue . In fact , in this c ase. This illus trates ho w difficult it is to g et a mas s mo ving
close to the sp eed of light . Much more energ y is nee ded than pre dicte d clas sically. Ever-incre asing amounts o f
energ y are nee ded to g et the v elocity o f a mas s a lit tle closer to tha t of light . An energ y of 3 Me V is a v ery small
amount f or an electron , and it c an b e achiev ed with present -day particle ac celera tors . SLAC, for e xample , can
accelera te electrons to o ver
Is there an y point in g etting va little closer to cthan 99.0% or 99.9%? The ans wer is y es. We learn a gre at deal
by doing this . The energ y tha t goes into a high-v elocity mas s can b e converted into an y other f orm , including
into entirely new p articles . In the Larg e Hadron C ollider in Figure 5.27 , charg ed particles are ac celera ted5.9 • Relativis tic Ener gy 221

before entering the ring-lik e structure . There , two beams o f particles are ac celera ted to their final sp eed of
about 99.7% the sp eed of light in opp osite directions , and made to c ollide , pro ducing totally new sp ecies o f
particles . Mos t of wha t we kno w about the subs tructure o f ma tter and the c ollection o f exotic shor t-lived
particles in na ture has b een le arne d this w ay. Patterns in the characteris tics o f these previously unkno wn
particles hint a t a b asic subs tructure f or all ma tter. These p articles and some o f their characteris tics will b e
discus sed in a la ter chapter on p article ph ysics .
Figur e5.27 The Eur opean Or ganization f or Nuclear R esear ch (cal led CERN aft er its F rench name) oper ates the lar gest par ticle
accelerator in the w orld, s traddling the bor der betw een F rance and Switz erland. (cr edit: modification o f work b y NASA)
Total Relativis tic Ener gy
The e xpres sion f or kinetic energ y can b e re arrang ed to:
Eins tein argue d in a sep arate ar ticle , also la ter publishe d in 1905, tha t if the energ y of a p article chang es b y
its mas s chang es b y Abundant e xperimental evidenc e sinc e then c onfirms tha t
corresp onds to the energ y tha t the p article o f mas smhas when a t res t. For e xample , when a neutral pion o f
mas smat res t dec ays into tw o photons , the photons ha ve zero mas s but are obser ved to ha ve total energ y
corresp onding to for the pion . Similarly , when a p article o f mas smdecays into tw o or more p articles with
smaller total mas s, the obser ved kinetic energ y imp arted to the pro ducts o f the dec ay corresp onds to the
decre ase in mas s. Thus ,Eis the total rela tivis tic energ y of the p article , and is its res t energ y.
Total Ener gy
Total ener gyEof a p article is
where mis mas s,cis the sp eed of light , and uis the v elocity o f the mas s rela tive to an
obser ver.5.9222 5 • Relativit y
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

This is the c orrect f orm o f Eins tein ’s mos t famous e qua tion , which f or the firs t time sho wed tha t energ y is
rela ted to the mas s of an object a t res t. For e xample , if energ y is s tore d in the object , its res t mas s incre ases .
This also implies tha t mas s can b e des troyed to rele ase energ y. The implic ations o f these firs t two equa tions
regarding rela tivis tic energ y are so bro ad tha t the y were not c ompletely rec ogniz ed for some y ears a fter
Eins tein publishe d them in 1905, nor w as the e xperimental pro of tha t the y are c orrect widely rec ogniz ed at
first. Eins tein , it should b e note d, did unders tand and describ e the me anings and implic ations o f his theor y.
EXAMPLE 5.13
Calcula ting R est Ener gy
Calcula te the res t energ y of a 1.00- g mas s.
Strategy
One gram is a small mas s—les s than one -half the mas s of a p enn y. We can multiply this mas s, in SI units , by
the sp eed of light square d to find the e quiv alent res t energ y.
Solution
a.Identif y the kno wns:
b.Identif y the unkno wn:
c.Expres s the ans wer as an e qua tion:
d.Do the c alcula tion:
e.Convert units . Noting tha t we see the res t energ y is:
Significanc e
This is an enormous amount o f energ y for a 1.00- g mas s. Rest energ y is larg e because the sp eed of light cis a
larg e numb er and is a v ery larg e numb er, so tha t is hug e for an y macrosc opic mas s. The
rest mas s energ y for 1.00 g is a bout twic e the energ y rele ased by the Hiroshima a tomic b omb and a bout
10,000 times the kinetic energ y of a larg e aircra ft carrier .
Today, the practic al applic ations o fthe c onversion o f mas s into another f orm o f energ y, such as in nucle ar
weapons and nucle ar p ower plants , are w ell kno wn. But examples also e xisted when Eins tein firs t prop osed
the c orrect f orm o f rela tivis tic energ y, and he did describ e some o f them . Nucle ar radia tion had b een
disc overed in the previous dec ade, and it had b een a m ystery as to where its energ y origina ted. The
explana tion w as tha t, in some nucle ar pro cesses, a small amount o f mas s is des troyed and energ y is rele ased
and c arrie d by nucle ar radia tion . But the amount o f mas s des troyed is so small tha t it is difficult to detect tha t
any is mis sing . Although Eins tein prop osed this as the sourc e of energ y in the radio activ e salts then b eing
studie d, it w as man y years b efore there w as bro ad rec ognition tha t mas s could b e and , in fact , commonly is ,
converted to energ y (Figure 5.28 ).Rest Ener gy
Rest ener gyof an object is
5.105.9 • Relativis tic Ener gy 223

Figur e5.28 (a) The sun and (b) the Susquehanna St eam Electric Station both c onvert mas s int o ener gy—the sun via nuclear fusion, and
the electric s tation via nuclear fis sion. (cr edit a: modification o f work b y NASA/SDO (AIA) )
Because o f the rela tionship o f res t energ y to mas s, we no w consider mas s to b e a f orm o f energ y ra ther than
something sep arate. There had not b een ev en a hint o f this prior to Eins tein ’s work. Energ y-mas s equiv alenc e
is no w kno wn to b e the sourc e of the sun ’s energ y, the energ y of nucle ar dec ay, and ev en one o f the sourc es o f
energ y keeping Ear th’s interior hot .
Stored Ener gy and P otential Ener gy
Wha t happ ens to energ y store d in an object a t res t, such as the energ y put into a b attery by charging it , or the
energ y store d in a to y gun ’s compres sed spring? The energ y input b ecomes p art of the total energ y of the
object and thus incre ases its res t mas s. All store d and p otential energ y becomes mas s in a s ystem . In seeming
contradiction , the principle o f conser vation o f mas s (me aning total mas s is c onstant) w as one o f the gre at laws
verifie d by nineteenth-c entur y scienc e. Wh y was it not notic ed to b e inc orrect? The f ollowing e xample helps
answer this ques tion .
EXAMPLE 5.14
Calcula ting R est Mas s
A car b attery is ra ted to b e able to mo ve 600 amp ere-hours of charg e at 12.0 V . (a) C alcula te the incre ase
in res t mas s of such a b attery when it is tak en from b eing fully deplete d to b eing fully charg ed, assuming none
of the chemic al re actants enter or le ave the b attery. (b) Wha t percent incre ase is this , giv en tha t the b attery’s
mas s is 20.0 k g?
Strategy
In p art (a), w e firs t mus t find the energ y store d as chemic al energ y in the b attery, which e quals the
electric al energ y the b attery can pro vide . Bec ause we ha ve to c alcula te the charg eqin
which is the pro duct o f the current Iand the time t. We then multiply the result b y 12.0 V . We can then
calcula te the b attery’s incre ase in mas s using Part (b) is a simple ra tio c onverted into a
percenta ge.
Solution f or (a)
a.Identif y the kno wns:
b.Identif y the unkno wn:
c.Expres s the ans wer as an e qua tion:224 5 • Relativit y
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

d.Do the c alcula tion:
Write amp eres A as c oulombs p er sec ond (C /s), and c onvert hours into sec onds:
where w e ha ve use d the c onversion
Solution f or (b)
For p art (b):
a.Identif y the kno wns:
b.Identif y the unkno wn: % chang e.
c.Expres s the ans wer as an e qua tion:
d.Do the c alcula tion:
Significanc e
Both the actual incre ase in mas s and the p ercent incre ase are v ery small , because energ y is divide d by a
very larg e numb er. We would ha ve to b e able to me asure the mas s of the b attery to a precision o f a billionth o f a
percent, or 1 p art in to notic e this incre ase. It is no w onder tha t the mas s varia tion is not re adily
obser ved. In fact , this chang e in mas s is so small tha t we ma y ques tion ho w an yone c ould v erify tha t it is re al.
The ans wer is f ound in nucle ar pro cesses in which the p ercenta ge of mas s des troyed is larg e enough to b e
measure d ac cura tely. The mas s of the fuel o f a nucle ar re actor , for e xample , is me asura bly smaller when its
energ y has b een use d. In tha t case, store d energ y has b een rele ased (converted mos tly into thermal energ y to
power electric g enera tors) and the res t mas s has decre ased. A decre ase in mas s also o ccurs from using the
energ y store d in a b attery, except tha t the s tore d energ y is much gre ater in nucle ar pro cesses, making the
chang e in mas s me asura ble in practic e as w ell as in theor y.
Relativis tic Ener gy and Momentum
We kno w clas sically tha t kinetic energ y and momentum are rela ted to e ach other , because:
Relativis tically, we can obtain a rela tionship b etween energ y and momentum b y alg ebraic ally manipula ting
their defining e qua tions . This yields:
where Eis the rela tivis tic total energ y, and pis the rela tivis tic momentum . This5.115.9 • Relativis tic Ener gy 225

rela tionship b etween rela tivis tic energ y and rela tivis tic momentum is more c omplic ated than the clas sical
version , but w e can g ain some interes ting new insights b y examining it . First, total energ y is rela ted to
momentum and res t mas s. At res t, momentum is z ero, and the e qua tion giv es the total energ y to b e the res t
energ y (so this e qua tion is c onsis tent with the discus sion o f res t energ y above). Ho wever, as the mas s is
accelera ted, its momentum pincre ases , thus incre asing the total energ y. At sufficiently high v elocities , the res t
energ y term becomes negligible c omp ared with the momentum term thus , at extremely
rela tivis tic v elocities .
If we consider momentum pto b e dis tinct from mas s, we can determine the implic ations o f the e qua tion
for a p article tha t has no mas s. If w e tak emto b e zero in this e qua tion , then
Mas sles s particles ha ve this momentum . There are sev eral mas sles s particles f ound in
nature , including photons ( which are p ackets o f electroma gnetic radia tion). Another implic ation is tha t a
mas sles s particle mus t tra vel at speedcand only a t speedc. It is b eyond the sc ope of this te xt to e xamine the
rela tionship in the e qua tion in detail , but y ou c an see tha t the rela tionship has imp ortant
implic ations in sp ecial rela tivity .
CHE CK Y OUR UNDER STANDING 5.9
Wha t is the kinetic energ y of an electron if its sp eed is 0.992 c?226 5 • Relativit y
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

CHAP TER RE VIEW
Key Terms
clas sical (G alile an) v elocity addit ion metho d of
adding v elocities when velocities add lik e
regular numb ers in one -dimensional motion:
where vis the v elocity b etween tw o
obser vers,uis the v elocity o f an object rela tive to
one obser ver, and is the v elocity rela tive to the
other obser ver
event occurrenc e in sp ace and time sp ecifie d by its
position and time c oordina tes ( x,y,z,t) me asure d
rela tive to a frame o f ref erenc e
first postulate of sp ecial relat ivitylaws of ph ysics
are the same in all iner tial frames o f ref erenc e
Galile an relat ivityif an obser ver me asures a
velocity in one frame o f ref erenc e, and tha t frame
of ref erenc e is mo ving with a v elocity p ast a
second ref erenc e frame , an obser ver in the
second frame me asures the original v elocity as
the v ector sum o f these v elocities
Galile an trans format ion rela tion b etween
position and time c oordina tes o f the same ev ents
as seen in diff erent ref erenc e frames , according
to clas sical mechanics
iner tial frame of ref erenc ereferenc e frame in
which a b ody a t res t remains a t res t and a b ody in
motion mo ves a t a c onstant sp eed in a s traight
line unles s acte d on b y an outside f orce
length c ontract ion decre ase in obser ved length o f
an object from its prop er length to length L
when its length is obser ved in a ref erenc e frame
where it is tra veling a t speedv
Lorentz trans format ion rela tion b etween p osition
and time c oordina tes o f the same ev ents as seen
in diff erent ref erenc e frames , according to the
special theor y of rela tivity
Michelson-Morle y experiment investigation
performe d in 1887 tha t sho wed tha t the sp eed of
light in a v acuum is the same in all frames o f
referenc e from which it is view ed
prop er length the dis tanc e between tw o points
measure d by an obser ver who is a t res t rela tive to
both o f the p oints; f or e xample , earthbound
obser vers me asure prop er length whenmeasuring the dis tanc e between tw o points tha t
are s tationar y rela tive to Ear th
prop er time is the time inter val me asure d by
an obser ver who sees the b eginning and end o f
the pro cess tha t the time inter val me asures o ccur
at the same lo cation
relat ivistic kinet ic ener gykinetic energ y of an
object mo ving a t rela tivis tic sp eeds
relat ivistic momentum the momentum o f an
object mo ving a t rela tivis tic v elocity;
relat ivistic velocity addit ion metho d of adding
velocities o f an object mo ving a t a rela tivis tic
speeds
rest ener gyenerg y store d in an object a t res t:
rest frame frame o f ref erenc e in which the
obser ver is a t res t
rest mas smas s of an object as me asure d by an
obser ver a t res t rela tive to the object
second p ostulate of sp ecial relat ivitylight tra vels
in a v acuum with the same sp eedcin an y
direction in all iner tial frames
special theor y of relat ivitytheor y tha t Albert
Eins tein prop osed in 1905 tha t assumes all the
laws of ph ysics ha ve the same f orm in ev ery
iner tial frame o f ref erenc e, and tha t the sp eed of
light is the same within all iner tial frames
speed of light ultima te sp eed limit f or an y particle
having mas s
time dilat ion lengthening o f the time inter val
between tw o ev ents when seen in a mo ving
iner tial frame ra ther than the res t frame o f the
events (in which the ev ents o ccur a t the same
location)
total ener gysum o f all energies f or a p article ,
including res t energ y and kinetic energ y, giv en
for a p article o f mas smand sp eeduby
where
world line path through sp ace-time
Key Equations
Time dila tion5 • Chap ter Re view 227

Lorentz factor
Length c ontraction
Galile an trans forma tion
Lorentz trans forma tion
Inverse Lorentz trans forma tion
Space-time in variants
Relativis tic v elocity addition
Relativis tic Doppler eff ect f or w avelength
Relativis tic Doppler eff ect f or fre quency
Relativis tic momentum
Relativis tic total energ y228 5 • Chap ter Re view
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Relativis tic kinetic energ y
Summar y
5.1Invariance o f Phy sical L aws
•Relativity is the s tudy o f ho w obser vers in
different ref erenc e frames me asure the same
event.
•Modern rela tivity is divide d into tw o parts.
Special rela tivity de als with obser vers in
unif orm (unac celera ted) motion , where as
general rela tivity includes ac celera ted rela tive
motion and gra vity. Mo dern rela tivity is
consis tent with all empiric al evidenc e thus far
and , in the limit o f low velocity and w eak
gravitation , giv es close a greement with the
predictions o f clas sical (G alile an) rela tivity .
•An iner tial frame o f ref erenc e is a ref erenc e
frame in which a b ody a t res t remains a t res t
and a b ody in motion mo ves a t a c onstant sp eed
in a s traight line unles s acte d up on b y an
outside f orce.
•Modern rela tivity is b ased on Eins tein ’s tw o
postula tes. The firs t postula te of special
rela tivity is tha t the la ws of ph ysics are the same
in all iner tial frames o f ref erenc e. The sec ond
postula te of special rela tivity is tha t the sp eed of
light cis the same in all iner tial frames o f
referenc e, indep endent o f the rela tive motion o f
the obser ver and the light sourc e.
•The Michelson-Morle y experiment
demons trated tha t the sp eed of light in a
vacuum is indep endent o f the motion o f Ear th
about the sun .
5.2Relativit y of Simultaneit y
•Two ev ents are define d to b e simultaneous if an
obser ver me asures them as o ccurring a t the
same time (such as b y rec eiving light from the
events).
•Two ev ents a t locations a dis tanc e ap art tha t are
simultaneous f or an obser ver a t res t in one
frame o f ref erenc e are not nec essarily
simultaneous f or an obser ver a t res t in a
different frame o f ref erenc e.
5.3Time Dilation
•Two ev ents are define d to b e simultaneous if an
obser ver me asures them as o ccurring a t the
same time . The y are not nec essarilysimultaneous to all obser vers—simultaneity is
not a bsolute .
•Time dila tion is the lengthening o f the time
inter val between tw o ev ents when seen in a
moving iner tial frame ra ther than the res t frame
of the ev ents (in which the ev ents o ccur a t the
same lo cation).
•Obser vers mo ving a t a rela tive velocity vdo not
measure the same elapse d time b etween tw o
events . Proper time is the time me asure d in
the ref erenc e frame where the s tart and end o f
the time inter val occur a t the same lo cation . The
time inter val measure d by an obser ver who
sees the frame o f events mo ving a t speedvis
rela ted to the prop er time inter val of the
events b y the e qua tion:
where
•The premise o f the twin p arado x is fa ulty
because the tra veling twin is ac celera ting . The
journe y is not s ymmetric al for the tw o twins .
•Time dila tion is usually negligible a t low rela tive
velocities , but it do es o ccur, and it has b een
verifie d by experiment .
•The prop er time is the shor test me asure o f an y
time inter val. An y obser ver who is mo ving
rela tive to the s ystem b eing obser ved me asures
a time inter val long er than the prop er time .
5.4Length C ontraction
•All obser vers a gree up on rela tive sp eed.
•Distanc e dep ends on an obser ver’s motion .
Proper length is the dis tanc e between tw o
points me asure d by an obser ver who is a t res t
rela tive to b oth o f the p oints .
•Length c ontraction is the decre ase in obser ved
length o f an object from its prop er length to
length Lwhen its length is obser ved in a
referenc e frame where it is tra veling a t speedv.
•The prop er length is the long est me asurement5 • Chap ter Re view 229

of an y length inter val. An y obser ver who is
moving rela tive to the s ystem b eing obser ved
measures a length shor ter than the prop er
length .
5.5The L orentz Transf ormation
•The G alile an trans forma tion e qua tions describ e
how, in clas sical nonrela tivis tic mechanics , the
position , velocity, and ac celera tions me asure d
in one frame app ear in another . Lengths remain
unchang ed and a single univ ersal time sc ale is
assume d to apply to all iner tial frames .
•Newton ’s laws of mechanics ob ey the principle
of having the same f orm in all iner tial frames
under a G alile an trans forma tion , giv en b y
The c oncept tha t times and dis tanc es are the
same in all iner tial frames in the G alile an
trans forma tion , however, is inc onsis tent with
the p ostula tes o f special rela tivity .
•The rela tivis tically c orrect Lorentz
trans forma tion e qua tions are
We can obtain these e qua tions b y re quiring an
expanding spheric al light signal to ha ve the
same shap e and sp eed of gro wth ,c, in b oth
referenc e frames .
•Relativis tic phenomena c an b e explaine d in
terms o f the g eometric al prop erties o f four-
dimensional sp ace-time , in which Lorentz
trans forma tions c orresp ond to rota tions o f axes.
•The Lorentz trans forma tion c orresp onds to a
space-time axis rota tion , similar in some w ays
to a rota tion o f space ax es, but in which the
invariant sp atial sep aration is giv en b y
rather than dis tanc es and tha t the Lorentz
trans forma tion in volving the time axis do es not
preser ve perpendicularity o f axes or the sc ales
along the ax es.
•The analy sis o f rela tivis tic phenomena in terms
of space-time dia grams supp orts the c onclusion
that these phenomena result from prop erties o f
space and time itself, ra ther than from the la ws
of electroma gnetism .5.6Relativis tic V elocit y Transf ormation
•With clas sical velocity addition , velocities add
like regular numb ers in one -dimensional
motion: where vis the v elocity
between tw o obser vers,uis the v elocity o f an
object rela tive to one obser ver, and is the
velocity rela tive to the other obser ver.
•Velocities c annot add to b e gre ater than the
speed of light .
•Relativis tic v elocity addition describ es the
velocities o f an object mo ving a t a rela tivis tic
velocity.
5.7Doppler Ef fect for Light
•An obser ver o f electroma gnetic radia tion sees
rela tivis tic Doppler eff ects if the sourc e of the
radia tion is mo ving rela tive to the obser ver. The
wavelength o f the radia tion is long er (c alled a
red shift) than tha t emit ted by the sourc e when
the sourc e mo ves a way from the obser ver and
shor ter (c alled a blue shift) when the sourc e
moves to ward the obser ver. The shifte d
wavelength is describ ed by the e qua tion:
where is the obser ved wavelength , is the
sourc e wavelength , and vis the rela tive velocity
of the sourc e to the obser ver.
5.8Relativis tic Momentum
•The la w of conser vation o f momentum is v alid
for rela tivis tic momentum whenev er the net
external f orce is z ero. The rela tivis tic
momentum is where mis the res t
mas s of the object ,uis its v elocity rela tive to an
obser ver, and the rela tivis tic factor is
•At low velocities , rela tivis tic momentum is
equiv alent to clas sical momentum .
•Relativis tic momentum appro aches infinity as u
appro aches c. This implies tha t an object with
mas s cannot re ach the sp eed of light .
5.9Relativis tic Ener gy
•The rela tivis tic w ork-energ y theorem is
•Relativis tically, where is the
rela tivis tic kinetic energ y.
•An object o fmas smat velocity uhas kinetic230 5 • Chap ter Re view
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

energ y where
•At low velocities , rela tivis tic kinetic energ y
reduces to clas sical kinetic energ y.
•No object with mas s can a ttain the sp eed of
light , because an infinite amount o f work and an
infinite amount o f energ y input is re quire d to
accelera te a mas s to the sp eed of light .
•Relativis tic energ y is c onser ved as long as w e
define it to include the p ossibility o f mas s
changing to energ y.
•The total energ y of a p article with mas sm
traveling a t speeduis define d as
where and udenotes the v elocity o fthe p article .
•The res t energ y of an object o f mas smis
meaning tha t mas s is a f orm o f
energ y. If energ y is s tore d in an object , its mas s
incre ases . Mas s can b e des troyed to rele ase
energ y.
•We do not ordinarily notic e the incre ase or
decre ase in mas s of an object b ecause the
chang e in mas s is so small f or a larg e incre ase
in energ y. The e qua tion
rela tes the rela tivis tic total energ yEand the
rela tivis tic momentum p. At extremely high
velocities , the res t energ y becomes
negligible , and
Concep tual Ques tions
5.1Invariance o f Phy sical L aws
1.Which o f Eins tein ’s postula tes o f special rela tivity
includes a c oncept tha t do es not fit with the ide as
of clas sical ph ysics? Explain .
2.Is Ear th an iner tial frame o f ref erenc e? Is the
sun? J ustify your resp onse .
3.When y ou are flying in a c ommercial jet , it ma y
app ear to y ou tha t the airplane is s tationar y and
Earth is mo ving b eneath you. Is this p oint o f view
valid? Discus s briefly .
5.3Time Dilation
4.(a) Do es motion a ffect the ra te of a clo ck as
measure d by an obser ver mo ving with it? ( b)
Does motion a ffect ho w an obser ver mo ving
rela tive to a clo ck me asures its ra te?
5.To whom do es the elapse d time f or a pro cess
seem to b e long er, an obser ver mo ving rela tive to
the pro cess or an obser ver mo ving with the
process? Which obser ver me asures the inter val
of prop er time?
6.(a) Ho w could y ou tra vel far into the future o f
Earth without a ging signific antly? ( b) C ould this
metho d also allo w you to tra vel into the p ast?
5.4Length C ontraction
7.To whom do es an object seem gre ater in length ,
an obser ver mo ving with the object or an
obser ver mo ving rela tive to the object? Which
obser ver me asures the object ’s prop er length?
8.Relativis tic eff ects such as time dila tion and
length c ontraction are present f or c ars and
airplanes . Wh y do these eff ects seem s trang e tous?
9.Supp ose an as trona ut is mo ving rela tive to Ear th
at a signific ant fraction o f the sp eed of light . (a)
Does he obser ve the ra te of his clo cks to ha ve
slowed? (b) Wha t chang e in the ra te of
earthbound clo cks do es he see? (c) Do es his ship
seem to him to shor ten? (d) Wha t about the
distanc e between tw o stars tha t lie in the
direction o f his motion? (e) Do he and an
earthbound obser ver a gree on his v elocity
rela tive to Ear th?
5.7Doppler Ef fect for Light
10.Explain the me aning o f the terms “re d shift ”
and “blue shift ” as the y rela te to the rela tivis tic
Doppler eff ect.
11.Wha t happ ens to the rela tivis tic Doppler eff ect
when rela tive velocity is z ero? Is this the
expecte d result?
12.Is the rela tivis tic Doppler eff ect c onsis tent with
the clas sical Doppler eff ect in the resp ect tha t
is larg er for motion a way?
13.All galaxies far ther a way than a bout
exhibit a re d shift in their emit ted
light tha t is prop ortional to dis tanc e, with those
farther and far ther a way ha ving progres sively
greater re d shifts . Wha t do es this imply ,
assuming tha t the only sourc e of red shift is
rela tive motion?
5.8Relativis tic Momentum
14.How do es mo dern rela tivity mo dify the la w of
conser vation o f momentum?
15.Is it p ossible f or an e xternal f orce to b e acting5 • Chap ter Re view 231

on a s ystem and rela tivis tic momentum to b e
conser ved? Explain .
5.9Relativis tic Ener gy
16.How are the clas sical la ws of conser vation o f
energ y and c onser vation o f mas s mo difie d by
modern rela tivity?
17.Wha t happ ens to the mas s of water in a p ot
when it c ools, assuming no molecules esc ape or
are adde d? Is this obser vable in practic e?
Explain .
18.Consider a thought e xperiment . You plac e an
expande d balloon o f air on w eighing sc ales
outside in the e arly morning . The b alloon s tays
on the sc ales and y ou are a ble to me asure
chang es in its mas s. Do es the mas s of the
balloon chang e as the da y progres ses? Discus s
the difficulties in c arrying out this e xperiment .19.The mas s of the fuel in a nucle ar re actor
decre ases b y an obser vable amount as it puts
out energ y. Is the same tr ue for the c oal and
oxygen c ombine d in a c onventional p ower
plant? If so , is this obser vable in practic e for the
coal and o xygen? Explain .
20.We kno w tha t the v elocity o f an object with mas s
has an upp er limit o fc. Is there an upp er limit
on its momentum? Its energ y? Explain .
21.Given the fact tha t light tra vels a tc, can it ha ve
mas s? Explain .
22.If you use an Ear th-b ased telesc ope to project a
laser b eam onto the mo on, you c an mo ve the
spot acros s the mo on’s sur face at a v elocity
greater than the sp eed of light . Do es this viola te
modern rela tivity? (N ote tha t light is b eing sent
from the Ear th to the mo on, not acros s the
surface of the mo on.)
Problems
5.3Time Dilation
23.(a) Wha t is if (b) If
24.(a) Wha t is if (b) If
25.Particles c alled-mesons are pro duced by
accelera tor b eams . If these p articles tra vel at
and liv e when a t
rest rela tive to an obser ver, how long do the y
live as view ed in the la boratory?
26.Supp ose a p article c alled a kaon is cre ated by
cosmic radia tion s triking the a tmosphere . It
moves b y you a t and it liv es
when a t res t rela tive to an
obser ver. Ho w long do es it liv e as y ou obser ve
it?
27.A neutral -meson is a p article tha t can b e
created by ac celera tor b eams . If one such
particle liv es as me asure d in
the la boratory, and when a t
rest rela tive to an obser ver, wha t is its v elocity
rela tive to the la boratory?
28.A neutron liv es 900 s when a t res t rela tive to an
obser ver. Ho w fas t is the neutron mo ving
rela tive to an obser ver who me asures its lif e
span to b e 2065 s?
29.If rela tivis tic eff ects are to b e les s than 1%, then
mus t be les s than 1.01. A t wha t rela tive
velocity is
30.If rela tivis tic eff ects are to b e les s than 3%, then
mus t be les s than 1.03. A t wha t rela tive
velocity is5.4Length C ontraction
31.A sp aceship , 200 m long as seen on b oard,
moves b y the Ear th a t 0.970 c. Wha t is its length
as me asure d by an e arthbound obser ver?
32.How fas t would a 6.0 m-long sp orts car ha ve to
be going p ast you in order f or it to app ear only
5.5 m long?
33.(a) Ho w far do es the muon in Example 5.3 travel
according to the e arthbound obser ver? ( b) Ho w
far do es it tra vel as view ed by an obser ver
moving with it? Base y our c alcula tion on its
velocity rela tive to the Ear th and the time it liv es
(prop er time). (c) V erify tha t these tw o dis tanc es
are rela ted through length c ontraction
34.(a) Ho w long w ould the muon in Example 5.3
have liv ed as obser ved on Ear th if its v elocity
was (b) Ho w far w ould it ha ve tra veled
as obser ved on Ear th? (c) Wha t dis tanc e is this
in the muon ’s frame?
35.Unre asonable R esults A sp aceship is he ading
directly to ward Ear th a t a v elocity o f 0.800 c. The
astrona ut on b oard claims tha t he c an send a
canis ter to ward the Ear th a t 1.20 crela tive to
Earth. (a) C alcula te the v elocity the c anis ter
mus t ha ve rela tive to the sp aceship . (b) Wha t is
unre asona ble a bout this result? (c) Which
assumptions are unre asona ble or inc onsis tent?
5.5The L orentz Transf ormation
36.Describ e the f ollowing ph ysical occurrenc es as
events , tha t is, in the f orm ( x,y,z,t): (a) A232 5 • Chap ter Re view
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

postman rings a do orbell o f a house precisely a t
noon. (b) A t the same time as the do orbell is
rung , a slic e of bre ad p ops out o f a to aster tha t is
located 10 m from the do or in the e ast direction
from the do or. (c) T en sec onds la ter, an airplane
arriv es a t the airp ort, which is 10 km from the
door in the e ast direction and 2 km to the south .
37.Describ e wha t happ ens to the angle
and theref ore to the trans forme d
axes in Figure 5.17 , as the rela tive velocity vof
the S and frames o f ref erenc e appro aches c.
38.Describ e the shap e of the w orld line on a sp ace-
time dia gram o f (a) an object tha t remains a t
rest at a sp ecific p osition along the x-axis; ( b) an
object tha t mo ves a t constant v elocity uin the
x-direction; (c) an object tha t begins a t res t and
accelera tes a t a c onstant ra te of in the p ositiv e
x-direction .
39.A man s tanding s till a t a train s tation w atches
two boys thro wing a b aseb all in a mo ving train .
Supp ose the train is mo ving e ast with a c onstant
speed of 20 m/s and one o f the b oys thro ws the
ball with a sp eed of 5 m/s with resp ect to
himself to ward the other b oy, who is 5 m w est
from him . Wha t is the v elocity o f the b all as
obser ved by the man on the s tation?
40.When obser ved from the sun a t a p articular
instant , Ear th and Mars app ear to mo ve in
opp osite directions with sp eeds 108,000 km/h
and 86,871 km/h , resp ectiv ely. Wha t is the
speed of Mars a t this ins tant when obser ved
from Ear th?
41.A man is r unning on a s traight ro ad
perpendicular to a train track and a way from
the track a t a sp eed of 12 m/s . The train is
moving with a sp eed of 30 m/s with resp ect to
the track . Wha t is the sp eed of the man with
resp ect to a p asseng er sit ting a t res t in the
train?
42.A man is r unning on a s traight ro ad tha t mak es
with the train track . The man is r unning in
the direction on the ro ad tha t is a way from the
track a t a sp eed of 12 m/s . The train is mo ving
with a sp eed of 30 m/s with resp ect to the track .
Wha t is the sp eed of the man with resp ect to a
passeng er sit ting a t res t in the train?
43.In a frame a t res t with resp ect to the billiard
table, a billiard b all o f mas smmoving with
speedvstrikes another billiard b all o f mas sm
at res t. The firs t ball c omes to res t after the
collision while the sec ond b all tak es o ff with
speedvin the original direction o f the motion o f
the firs t ball. This sho ws tha t momentum isconser ved in this frame . (a) N ow, describ e the
same c ollision from the p ersp ectiv e of a frame
that is mo ving with sp eedvin the direction o f
the motion o f the firs t ball. (b) Is the momentum
conser ved in this frame?
44.In a frame a t res t with resp ect to the billiard
table, two billiard b alls o f same mas smare
moving to ward e ach other with the same sp eed
v. After the c ollision , the tw o balls c ome to res t.
(a) Sho w tha t momentum is c onser ved in this
frame . (b) N ow, describ e the same c ollision from
the p ersp ectiv e of a frame tha t is mo ving with
speedvin the direction o f the motion o f the firs t
ball. (c) Is the momentum c onser ved in this
frame?
45.In a frame S, tw o ev ents are obser ved: ev ent 1: a
pion is cre ated at res t at the origin and ev ent 2:
the pion disintegra tes a fter time . Another
obser ver in a frame is mo ving in the p ositiv e
direction along the p ositiv ex-axis with a
constant sp eedvand obser ves the same tw o
events in his frame . The origins o f the tw o
frames c oincide a t (a) F ind the
positions and timings o f these tw o ev ents in the
frame (a) ac cording to the G alile an
trans forma tion , and ( b) ac cording to the Lorentz
trans forma tion .
5.6Relativis tic V elocit y Transf ormation
46.If tw o sp aceships are he ading directly to ward
each other a t 0.800 c, at wha t speed mus t a
canis ter b e shot from the firs t ship to appro ach
the other a t 0.999 cas seen b y the sec ond ship?
47.Two planets are on a c ollision c ourse , heading
directly to ward e ach other a t 0.250 c. A
spaceship sent from one planet appro aches the
second a t 0.750 cas seen b y the sec ond planet .
Wha t is the v elocity o f the ship rela tive to the
first planet?
48.When a mis sile is shot from one sp aceship
toward another , it le aves the firs t at 0.950 cand
appro aches the other a t 0.750 c. Wha t is the
rela tive velocity o f the tw o ships?
49.Wha t is the rela tive velocity o f two sp aceships if
one fires a mis sile a t the other a t 0.750 cand the
other obser ves it to appro ach a t 0.950 c?
50.Prove tha t for an y rela tive velocity vbetween
two obser vers, a b eam o f light sent from one to
the other will appro ach a t speedc(pro vide d
thatvis les s than c, of course).
51.Sho w tha t for an y rela tive velocity vbetween
two obser vers, a b eam o f light projecte d by one
directly a way from the other will mo ve away at5 • Chap ter Re view 233

the sp eed of light (pro vide d tha tvis les s than c,
of course).
5.7Doppler Ef fect for Light
52.A high way patrol o fficer uses a devic e tha t
measures the sp eed of vehicles b y bouncing
radar o ff them and me asuring the Doppler shift .
The out going radar has a fre quency o f 100 GHz
and the returning echo has a fre quency 15.0
kHz higher . Wha t is the v elocity o f the v ehicle?
Note tha t there are tw o Doppler shifts in echo es.
Be c ertain not to round o ff until the end o f the
problem , because the eff ect is small .
5.8Relativis tic Momentum
53.Find the momentum o f a helium nucleus ha ving
a mas s of that is mo ving a t
0.200 c.
54.Wha t is the momentum o f an electron tra veling
at 0.980 c?
55.(a) F ind the momentum o f a
asteroid he ading to wards Ear th a t 30.0 km/s . (b)
Find the ra tio o f this momentum to the clas sical
momentum . (Hint: U se the appro xima tion tha t
at low velocities .)
56.(a) Wha t is the momentum o f a 2000-k g sa tellite
orbiting a t 4.00 km/s? ( b) F ind the ra tio o f this
momentum to the clas sical momentum . (Hint:
Use the appro xima tion tha t
at low velocities .)
57.Wha t is the v elocity o f an electron tha t has a
momentum o f ? Note
that you mus t calcula te the v elocity to a t least
four digits to see the diff erenc e from c.
58.Find the v elocity o f a proton tha t has a
momentum o f
5.9Relativis tic Ener gy
59.Wha t is the res t energ y of an electron , giv en its
mas s is Give your ans wer in
joules and Me V.
60.Find the res t energ y in joules and Me V of a
proton , giv en its mas s is
61.If the res t energies o f a proton and a neutron
(the tw o constituents o f nuclei) are 938.3 and
939.6 Me V, resp ectiv ely, wha t is the diff erenc e
in their mas s in kilograms?
62.The Big Bang tha t began the univ erse is
estima ted to ha ve rele ased of energ y.
How man y stars c ould half this energ y cre ate,
assuming the a verage star’s mas s is?
63.A sup erno va explosion o f a star
produces of energ y. (a) Ho w
man y kilograms o f mas s are c onverted to
energ y in the e xplosion? ( b) Wha t is the ra tio
of mas s des troyed to the original mas s of
the s tar?
64.(a) U sing da ta from Potential Energ y of a
System , calcula te the mas s converted to energ y
by the fis sion o f 1.00 k g of uranium . (b) Wha t is
the ra tio o f mas s des troyed to the original mas s,
65.(a) U sing da ta from Potential Energ y of a
System , calcula te the amount o f mas s converted
to energ y by the fusion o f 1.00 k g of hydrog en.
(b) Wha t is the ra tio o f mas s des troyed to the
original mas s, ? (c) Ho w do es this
comp are with for the fis sion o f 1.00 k g of
uranium?
66.There is appro xima tely of energ y
available from fusion o f hydrog en in the w orld ’s
oceans. (a) If of this energ y were utiliz ed,
wha t would b e the decre ase in mas s of the
oceans (ignoring the los s of mas s from the
lefto ver o xygen)? ( b) Ho w gre at a v olume o f
water do es this c orresp ond to? (c) C omment on
whether this is a signific ant fraction o f the total
mas s of the o ceans.
67.A muon has a res t mas s energ y of 105.7 Me V,
and it dec ays into an electron and a mas sles s
particle . (a) If all the los t mas s is c onverted into
the electron ’s kinetic energ y, find for the
electron . (b) Wha t is the electron ’s velocity?
68.A-meson is a p article tha t dec ays into a muon
and a mas sles s particle . The -meson has a res t
mas s energ y of 139.6 Me V, and the muon has a
rest mas s energ y of 105.7 Me V. Supp ose the
-meson is a t res t and all o f the mis sing mas s
goes into the muon ’s kinetic energ y. Ho w fas t
will the muon mo ve?
69.(a) C alcula te the rela tivis tic kinetic energ y of a
1000-k g car mo ving a t 30.0 m/s if the sp eed of
light w ere only 45.0 m/s . (b) F ind the ra tio o f the
rela tivis tic kinetic energ y to clas sical.
70.Alpha dec ay is nucle ar dec ay in which a helium
nucleus is emit ted. If the helium nucleus has a
mas s of and is giv en 5.00 Me V
of kinetic energ y, wha t is its v elocity?
71.(a) Beta dec ay is nucle ar dec ay in which an
electron is emit ted. If the electron is giv en 0.750
MeV of kinetic energ y, wha t is its v elocity? ( b)
Comment on ho w the high v elocity is c onsis tent
with the kinetic energ y as it c omp ares to the234 5 • Chap ter Re view
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

rest mas s energ y of the electron .
Additional P roblems
72.(a) A t wha t rela tive velocity is (b) A t
wha t rela tive velocity is
73.(a) A t wha t rela tive velocity is (b) A t
wha t rela tive velocity is
74.Unre asonable R esults (a) F ind the v alue o f
require d for the f ollowing situa tion . An
earthbound obser ver me asures 23.9 h to ha ve
passed while signals from a high-v elocity sp ace
prob e indic ate tha t 24.0 h ha ve passed on
board. (b) Wha t is unre asona ble a bout this
result? (c) Which as sumptions are unre asona ble
or inc onsis tent?
75.(a) Ho w long do es it tak e the as trona ut in
Example 5.5 to tra vel 4.30 ly a t (as
measure d by the e arthbound obser ver)? ( b)
How long do es it tak e ac cording to the
astrona ut? (c) V erify tha t these tw o times are
rela ted through time dila tion with as
given.
76.(a) Ho w fas t would an a thlete nee d to b e
running f or a 100- race to lo ok 100 y d long?
(b) Is the ans wer consis tent with the fact tha t
rela tivis tic eff ects are difficult to obser ve in
ordinar y circums tanc es? Explain .
77.(a) F ind the v alue o ffor the f ollowing situa tion .
An as trona ut me asures the length o f his
spaceship to b e 100 m , while an e arthbound
obser ver me asures it to b e 25.0 m . (b) Wha t is
the sp eed of the sp aceship rela tive to Ear th?
78.A clo ck in a sp aceship r uns one -tenth the ra te at
which an identic al clo ck on Ear th runs. Wha t is
the sp eed of the sp aceship?
79.An as trona ut has a he artbeat rate of 66 b eats
per minute as me asure d during his ph ysical
exam on Ear th. The he artbeat rate of the
astrona ut is me asure d when he is in a
spaceship tra veling a t 0.5 cwith resp ect to Ear th
by an obser ver (A) in the ship and b y an
obser ver (B) on Ear th. (a) Describ e an
experimental metho d by which obser ver B on
Earth will b e able to determine the he artbeat
rate of the as trona ut when the as trona ut is in
the sp aceship . (b) Wha t will b e the he artbeat
rate(s) o f the as trona ut rep orted by obser vers A
and B ?80.A sp aceship (A) is mo ving a t speedc/2 with
resp ect to another sp aceship (B). Obser vers in A
and B set their clo cks so tha t the ev ent a t (x, y, z,
t) of turning on a laser in sp aceship B has
coordina tes (0 ,0,0,0) in A and also (0 ,0,0,0) in
B. An obser ver a t the origin o f B turns on the
laser a t and turns it o ff at in his time .
Wha t is the time dura tion b etween on and o ff as
seen b y an obser ver in A ?
81.Same tw o obser vers as in the prec eding
exercise , but no w w e look a t two ev ents
occurring in sp aceship A . A photon arriv es a t
the origin o f A a t its time and another
photon arriv es a t at in
the frame o f ship A . (a) F ind the c oordina tes and
times o f the tw o ev ents as seen b y an obser ver
in frame B . (b) In which frame are the tw o
events simultaneous and in which frame are
they are not simultaneous?
82.Same tw o obser vers as in the prec eding
exercises . A ro d of length 1 m is laid out on the
x-axis in the frame o f B from origin to
Wha t is the length o f the ro d
obser ved by an obser ver in the frame o f
spaceship A ?
83.An obser ver a t origin o f iner tial frame S sees a
flashbulb g o off at
and at time At
wha t time and p osition in the S system did the
flash o ccur, if S is mo ving along share d
x-direction with S a t a v elocity
84.An obser ver sees tw o ev ents apart
at a sep aration o f 800 m . Ho w fas t mus t a
second obser ver b e mo ving rela tive to the firs t
to see the tw o ev ents o ccur simultaneously?
85.An obser ver standing b y the railro ad tracks sees
two bolts o f lightning s trike the ends o f a
500-m-long train simultaneously a t the ins tant
the middle o f the train p asses him a t 50 m/s .
Use the Lorentz trans forma tion to find the time
between the lightning s trikes as me asure d by a
passeng er se ated in the middle o f the train .
86.Two as tronomic al ev ents are obser ved from
Earth to o ccur a t a time o f 1 s ap art and a
distanc e sep aration o f from e ach
other . (a) Determine whether sep aration o f the
two ev ents is sp ace lik e or time lik e. (b) Sta te
wha t this implies a bout whether it is c onsis tent
with sp ecial rela tivity f or one ev ent to ha ve
caused the other?5 • Chap ter Re view 235

87.Two as tronomic al ev ents are obser ved from
Earth to o ccur a t a time o f 0.30 s ap art and a
distanc e sep aration o f from e ach
other . Ho w fas t mus t a sp acecra ft tra vel from
the site o f one ev ent to ward the other to mak e
the ev ents o ccur a t the same time when
measure d in the frame o f ref erenc e of the
spacecra ft?
88.A sp acecra ft starts from b eing a t res t at the
origin and ac celera tes a t a c onstant ra teg, as
seen from Ear th, tak en to b e an iner tial frame ,
until it re aches a sp eed ofc/2. (a) Sho w tha t the
increment o f prop er time is rela ted to the
elapse d time in Ear th’s frame b y:
(b) F ind an e xpres sion f or the elapse d time to
reach sp eedc/2 as seen in Ear th’s frame . (c) U se
the rela tionship in (a) to obtain a similar
expres sion f or the elapse d prop er time to re ach
c/2 as seen in the sp acecra ft, and determine the
ratio o f the time seen from Ear th with tha t on
the sp acecra ft to re ach the final sp eed.
89.(a) A ll but the closes t galaxies are rec eding from
our o wn Milky W ay Galaxy . If a g alaxy
away is rec eding from us a t
0.900 c, at wha t velocity rela tive to us mus t we
send an e xplora tory prob e to appro ach the
other g alaxy a t 0.990 cas me asure d from tha t
galaxy? ( b) Ho w long will it tak e the prob e to
reach the other g alaxy as me asure d from Ear th?
You ma y as sume tha t the v elocity o f the other
galaxy remains c onstant . (c) Ho w long will it
then tak e for a radio signal to b e beame d back?
(All of this is p ossible in principle , but not
practic al.)
90.Supp ose a sp aceship he ading s traight to ward
the Ear th a t 0.750 ccan sho ot a c anis ter a t
0.500 crela tive to the ship . (a) Wha t is the
velocity o f the c anis ter rela tive to Ear th, if it is
shot directly a t Ear th? ( b) If it is shot directly
away from Ear th?
91.Repeat the prec eding problem with the ship
heading directly a way from Ear th.
92.If a sp aceship is appro aching the Ear th a t
0.100 cand a mes sage capsule is sent to ward it
at 0.100 crela tive to Ear th, wha t is the sp eed of
the c apsule rela tive to the ship?93.(a) Supp ose the sp eed of light w ere only 3000
m/s . A jet fighter mo ving to ward a targ et on the
ground a t 800 m/s sho ots bullets , each ha ving a
muzzle v elocity o f 1000 m/s . Wha t are the
bullets’ v elocity rela tive to the targ et? ( b) If the
speed of light w as this small , would y ou obser ve
rela tivis tic eff ects in ev eryday life? Discus s.
94.If a g alaxy mo ving a way from the Ear th has a
speed of 1000 km/s and emits 656 nm light
characteris tic o f hydrog en (the mos t common
element in the univ erse). (a) Wha t wavelength
would w e obser ve on Ear th? ( b) Wha t typ e of
electroma gnetic radia tion is this? (c) Wh y is the
speed of Ear th in its orbit negligible here?
95.A sp ace prob e sp eeding to wards the ne ares t
star mo ves a t and sends radio
informa tion a t a bro adcast fre quency o f 1.00
GHz. Wha t fre quency is rec eived on Ear th?
96.Near the c enter o f our g alaxy , hydrog en g as is
moving directly a way from us in its orbit a bout a
black hole . We rec eive 1900 nm
electroma gnetic radia tion and kno w tha t it w as
1875 nm when emit ted by the h ydrog en g as.
Wha t is the sp eed of the g as?
97.(a) C alcula te the sp eed of a particle o f
dust tha t has the same momentum as a proton
moving a t 0.999 c. (b) Wha t do es the small sp eed
tell us a bout the mas s of a proton c omp ared to
even a tin y amount o f macrosc opic ma tter?
98.(a) C alcula te for a proton tha t has a
momentum o f (b) Wha t is its
speed? Such protons f orm a rare c omp onent o f
cosmic radia tion with unc ertain origins .
99.Sho w tha t the rela tivis tic f orm o f Newton ’s
second la w is (a) (b)
Find the f orce nee ded to ac celera te a mas s of 1
kg by 1 when it is tra veling a t a v elocity o f
c/2.
100 .A positron is an antima tter v ersion o f the
electron , having e xactly the same mas s. When
a positron and an electron meet , the y
annihila te, converting all o f their mas s into
energ y. (a) F ind the energ y rele ased, assuming
negligible kinetic energ y before the
annihila tion . (b) If this energ y is giv en to a
proton in the f orm o f kinetic energ y, wha t is its
velocity? (c) If this energ y is giv en to another
electron in the f orm o f kinetic energ y, wha t is
its v elocity?236 5 • Chap ter Re view
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

101 .Wha t is the kinetic energ y in Me V of a π-meson
that lives as me asure d in the
laboratory, and when a t res t
rela tive to an obser ver, giv en tha t its res t
energ y is 135 Me V?
102 .Find the kinetic energ y in Me V of a neutron
with a me asure d lif e sp an o f 2065 s , giv en its
rest energ y is 939.6 Me V, and res t life sp an is
900s .
103 .(a) Sho w tha t This
means tha t at larg e velocities (b) Is
when as for the as trona ut
discus sed in the twin p arado x?
104 .One c osmic ra y neutron has a v elocity o f
rela tive to the Ear th. (a) Wha t is the
neutron ’s total energ y in Me V? (b) F ind its
momentum . (c) Is in this situa tion?
Discus s in terms o f the e qua tion giv en in p art
(a) o f the previous problem .
105 .Wha t is for a proton ha ving a mas s energ y of
938.3 Me V ac celera ted through an eff ectiv e
potential o f 1.0 T V (tera volt)?
106 .(a) Wha t is the eff ectiv e ac celera ting p otential
for electrons a t the Stanf ord Line ar
Accelera tor, if for them? ( b)
Wha t is their total energ y (ne arly the same as
kinetic in this c ase) in Ge V?
107 .(a) U sing da ta from Potential Energ y of a
System , find the mas s des troyed when the
energ y in a b arrel o f crude oil is rele ased. (b)
Given these b arrels c ontain 200 liters and
assuming the density o f crude oil is
wha t is the ra tio o f mas s des troyed to original
mas s,
108 .(a) C alcula te the energ y rele ased by the
destruction o f 1.00 k g of mas s. (b) Ho w man y
kilograms c ould b e lifte d to a 10.0 km height
by this amount o f energ y?
109 .A Van de Graa ff ac celera tor utiliz es a 50.0 MV
potential diff erenc e to ac celera te charg ed
particles such as protons . (a) Wha t is the
velocity o f a proton ac celera ted by such a
potential? ( b) An electron?110 .Supp ose y ou use an a verage of of
electric energ y per month in y our home . (a)
How long w ould 1.00 g o f mas s converted to
electric energ y with an efficiency o f 38.0% las t
you? ( b) Ho w man y homes c ould b e supplie d at
the per month ra te for one y ear b y
the energ y from the describ ed mas s
conversion?
111 .(a) A nucle ar p ower plant c onverts energ y
from nucle ar fis sion into electricity with an
efficiency o f 35.0%. Ho w much mas s is
destroyed in one y ear to pro duce a c ontinuous
1000 MW o f electric p ower? ( b) Do y ou think it
would b e possible to obser ve this mas s los s if
the total mas s of the fuel is
112 .Nucle ar-powered ro ckets w ere rese arche d for
some y ears b efore sa fety c oncerns b ecame
paramount . (a) Wha t fraction o f a ro cket’s
mas s would ha ve to b e des troyed to g et it into a
low Ear th orbit , neglecting the decre ase in
gravity? (As sume an orbital altitude o f 250 km ,
and c alcula te both the kinetic energ y
(clas sical) and the gra vitational p otential
energ y nee ded.) (b) If the ship has a mas s of
(100 tons), wha t total yield
nucle ar e xplosion in tons o f TNT is nee ded?
113 .The sun pro duces energ y at a ra te of
W b y the fusion o f hydrog en.
About 0.7% o f each kilogram o f hydrog en g oes
into the energ y genera ted by the Sun . (a) Ho w
man y kilograms o f hydrog en underg o fusion
each sec ond? ( b) If the sun is 90.0% h ydrog en
and half o f this c an underg o fusion b efore the
sun chang es character , how long c ould it
produce energ y at its current ra te? (c) Ho w
man y kilograms o f mas s is the sun losing p er
second? (d) Wha t fraction o f its mas s will it
have los t in the time f ound in p art (b)?
114 .Sho w tha t for a p article is in variant
under Lorentz trans forma tions .5 • Chap ter Re view 237

238 5 • Chap ter Re view
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

INTR ODUCTIONCHAP TER 6
Phot ons and Mat ter W aves
6.1Blackbody Radiation
6.2Photoelec tric Ef fect
6.3The C omp ton Ef fect
6.4Bohr ’s Model o f the Hy drogen A tom
6.5De Br oglie ’s Mat ter W aves
6.6Wave-Particle Dualit y
Two of the mos t rev olutionar y concepts o f the tw entieth c entur y were the description o f
light as a c ollection o f particles , and the tre atment o f particles as w aves. These w ave prop erties o f ma tter ha ve
led to the disc overy of technologies such as electron microsc opy, which allo ws us to e xamine submicrosc opic
objects such as grains o f pollen , as sho wn a bove.
In this chapter , you will le arn a bout the energ y quantum , a c oncept tha t was intro duced in 1900 b y the German
physicis t Max Planck to e xplain blackb ody radia tion . We discus s ho w Albert Eins tein e xtende d Planck ’s
Figur e6.1 In this imag e of pol len tak en with an electr on micr oscope, the bean-shaped gr ains ar e about
long . Electr on micr oscopes can ha ve a much higher r esol ving po wer than a c onventional light micr oscope because
electr on w avelengths can be 100,000 times shor ter than the w avelengths o f visible -light phot ons. (credit:
modification o f work b y Dar tmouth Col lege Electr on Micr oscope F acility)
Chap ter Outline

concept to a quantum o f light (a “photon ”) to e xplain the photo electric eff ect. We also sho w ho w Americ an
physicis t Arthur H. C ompton use d the photon c oncept in 1923 to e xplain w avelength shifts obser ved in X -rays.
After a discus sion o f Bohr ’s mo del o f hydrog en, we describ e ho w ma tter w aves w ere p ostula ted in 1924 b y
Louis -Victor de Broglie to jus tify Bohr ’s mo del and w e examine the e xperiments c onducte d in 1923–1927 b y
Clinton Da visson and Les ter Germer tha t confirme d the e xistenc e of de Broglie ’s ma tter w aves.
6.1Blackbody Radiation
Learning Objectiv es
By the end o f this section, y ou wil l be able t o:
•Apply Wien ’s and S tefan’s law s to analy ze radiation emit ted b y a blackbody
•Explain Planck ’s hypo thesis o f ener gy quanta
All bodies emit electroma gnetic radia tion o ver a rang e of wavelengths . In an e arlier chapter , we learne d tha t a
cooler b ody radia tes les s energ y than a w armer b ody. We also kno w by obser vation tha t when a b ody is he ated
and its temp erature rises , the p erceived wavelength o f its emit ted radia tion chang es from infrare d to re d, and
then from re d to orang e, and so f orth. As its temp erature rises , the b ody glo ws with the c olors c orresp onding to
ever-smaller w avelengths o f the electroma gnetic sp ectr um. This is the underlying principle o f the
incandesc ent light bulb: A hot metal filament glo ws red, and when he ating c ontinues , its glo w ev entually
covers the entire visible p ortion o f the electroma gnetic sp ectr um. The temp erature ( T) of the object tha t emits
radia tion , or the emitter , determines the w avelength a t which the radia ted energ y is a t its maximum . For
example , the Sun , whose sur face temp erature is in the rang e between 5000 K and 6000 K , radia tes mos t
strongly in a rang e of wavelengths a bout 560 nm in the visible p art of the electroma gnetic sp ectr um. Your
body, when a t its normal temp erature o f about 300 K , radia tes mos t strongly in the infrare d part of the
spectr um.
Radia tion tha t is incident on an object is p artially a bsorb ed and p artially reflecte d. At thermo dynamic
equilibrium , the ra te at which an object a bsorbs radia tion is the same as the ra te at which it emits it . Theref ore,
a goodabsorb erof radia tion (an y object tha t absorbs radia tion) is also a g ood emit ter. A p erfect a bsorb er
absorbs all electroma gnetic radia tion incident on it; such an object is c alled ablackb ody.
Although the blackb ody is an ide aliza tion , because no ph ysical object a bsorbs 100% o f incident radia tion , we
can c onstruct a close re aliza tion o f a blackb ody in the f orm o f a small hole in the w all o f a se aled enclosure
kno wn as a c avity radia tor, as sho wn in Figure 6.2 . The inside w alls o f a c avity radia tor are rough and
black ened so tha t an y radia tion tha t enters through a tin y hole in the c avity w all b ecomes trapp ed inside the
cavity. At thermo dynamic e quilibrium (a t temp erature T), the c avity w alls a bsorb e xactly as much radia tion as
they emit . Furthermore , inside the c avity, the radia tion entering the hole is b alanc ed by the radia tion le aving it .
The emis sion sp ectr um o f a blackb ody c an b e obtaine d by analyzing the light radia ting from the hole .
Electroma gnetic w aves emit ted by a blackb ody are c alledblackb ody radiat ion.240 6 • Pho tons and Mat ter W aves
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Figur e6.2 A blackbody is ph ysical ly realiz ed b y a smal l hole in the w all of a ca vity r adiat or.
The intensity of blackb ody radia tion dep ends on the w avelength of the emit ted radia tion and on the
temp erature Tof the blackb ody (Figure 6.3 ). The function is the power intensit ythat is radia ted per
unit w avelength; in other w ords , it is the p ower radia ted per unit are a of the hole in a c avity radia tor p er unit
wavelength . According to this definition , is the p ower p er unit are a tha t is emit ted in the w avelength
inter val from to The intensity dis tribution among w avelengths o f radia tion emit ted by cavities w as
studie d experimentally a t the end o f the nineteenth c entur y. Generally , radia tion emit ted by ma terials only
appro xima tely f ollows the blackb ody radia tion cur ve (Figure 6.4 ); ho wever, spectra o f common s tars do f ollow
the blackb ody radia tion cur ve very closely .
Figur e6.3 The int ensity o f blackbody r adiation v ersus the w avelength o f the emit ted radiation. Each cur ve corresponds t o a diff erent
blackbody t emper atur e, starting with a lo w temper atur e (the lo west cur ve) to a high t emper atur e (the highes t cur ve).6.1 • Blackbody Radiation 241

Figur e6.4 The spectrum o f radiation emit ted fr om a quar tz sur face (blue cur ve) and the blackbody r adiation cur ve (black cur ve) at 600 K .
Two imp ortant la ws summariz e the e xperimental findings o f blackb ody radia tion: Wien’s displac ement la w
and Stefan ’s law.Wien’s displac ement la wis illus trated in Figure 6.3 by the cur ve connecting the maxima on
the intensity cur ves. In these cur ves, we see tha t the hot ter the b ody, the shor ter the w avelength c orresp onding
to the emis sion p eak in the radia tion cur ve. Quantita tively, Wien’s law re ads
where is the p osition o f the maximum in the radia tion cur ve. In other w ords , is the w avelength a t
which a blackb ody radia tes mos t strongly a t a giv en temp erature T. Note tha t in Equa tion 6.1 , the temp erature
is in k elvins . Wien’s displac ement la w allo ws us to es tima te the temp eratures o f dis tant s tars b y me asuring the
wavelength o f radia tion the y emit .
EXAMPLE 6.1
Temper atures o f Dis tant S tars
On a cle ar ev ening during the winter months , if y ou happ en to b e in the N orthern Hemisphere and lo ok up a t
the sky , you c an see the c onstella tion Orion ( The Hunter). One s tar in this c onstella tion ,Rigel, flick ers in a blue
color and another s tar,Betelg euse , has a re ddish c olor , as sho wn in Figure 6.5 . Which o f these tw o stars is
cooler , Betelg euse or Rig el?
Strategy
We tre at each s tar as a blackb ody. Then ac cording to W ien’s law, its temp erature is in versely prop ortional to
the w avelength o f its p eak intensity . The w avelength of blue light is shor ter than the w avelength of
red light . Even if w e do not kno w the precise w avelengths , we can s till set up a prop ortion .
Solution
Writing W ien’s law for the blue s tar and f or the re d star, we ha ve
When simplifie d,Equa tion 6.2 gives6.1
6.2242 6 • Pho tons and Mat ter W aves
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Theref ore, Betelg euse is c ooler than Rig el.
Significanc e
Note tha t Wien’s displac ement la w tells us tha t the higher the temp erature o f an emit ting b ody, the shor ter the
wavelength o f the radia tion it emits . The qualita tive analy sis presente d in this e xample is g enerally v alid f or
any emit ting b ody, whether it is a big object such as a s tar or a small object such as the glo wing filament in an
incandesc ent lightbulb .
CHE CK Y OUR UNDER STANDING 6.1
The flame o f a p each-sc ente d candle has a y ellowish c olor and the flame o f a B unsen ’s burner in a chemis try
lab has a bluish c olor . Which flame has a higher temp erature?
Figur e6.5 In the Orion c onstellation, the r ed s tar Bet elgeuse , which usual ly tak es on a y ellowish tint, appears as the fig ure’s right
shoulder (in the upper left). The giant blue s tar on the bot tom right is Rig el, which appears as the hunt er’s left f oot. (cr edit left: modification
of work b y Mat thew Spinel li, NASA APOD)
The sec ond e xperimental rela tion is Stefan ’s law,which c oncerns the total p ower o f blackb ody radia tion
emit ted acros s the entire sp ectr um o f wavelengths a t a giv en temp erature . InFigure 6.3 , this total p ower is
represente d by the are a under the blackb ody radia tion cur ve for a giv enT. As the temp erature o f a blackb ody
incre ases , the total emit ted power also incre ases . Quantita tively, Stefan ’s law expres ses this rela tion as
where is the sur face are a of a blackb ody,Tis its temp erature (in k elvins), and is the Stef an–Boltzmann
cons tant , Stefan ’s law ena bles us to es tima te ho w much energ y a s tar is
radia ting b y remotely me asuring its temp erature .6.3
6.46.1 • Blackbody Radiation 243

EXAMPLE 6.2
Power R adia ted b y Stars
A star such as our Sun will ev entually ev olve to a “re d giant ” star and then to a “ white dw arf” star. A typic al
white dw arf is appro xima tely the siz e of Ear th, and its sur face temp erature is a bout A typic al re d
giant has a sur face temp erature o f and a radius ~100,000 times larg er than tha t of a white dw arf.
Wha t is the a verage radia ted power p er unit are a and the total p ower radia ted by each o f these typ es o f stars?
How do the y comp are?
Strategy
If we tre at the s tar as a blackb ody, then ac cording to Stefan ’s law, the total p ower tha t the s tar radia tes is
prop ortional to the f ourth p ower o f its temp erature . To find the p ower radia ted per unit are a of the sur face, we
do not nee d to mak e an y as sumptions a bout the shap e of the s tar b ecause P/Adep ends only on temp erature .
However, to c ompute the total p ower, we nee d to mak e an as sumption tha t the energ y radia tes through a
spheric al sur face enclosing the s tar, so tha t the sur face are a is where Ris its radius .
Solution
A simple prop ortion b ased on Stefan ’s law giv es
The p ower emit ted per unit are a by a white dw arf is a bout 5000 times tha t the p ower emit ted by a re d giant .
Denoting this ra tio b y Equa tion 6.5 gives
We see tha t the total p ower emit ted by a white dw arf is a tin y fraction o f the total p ower emit ted by a re d giant .
Despite its rela tively lo wer temp erature , the o verall p ower radia ted by a re d giant far e xceeds tha t of the white
dwarf because the re d giant has a much larg er sur face are a. To es tima te the a bsolute v alue o f the emit ted
power p er unit are a, w e again use Stefan ’s law. For the white dw arf, we obtain
The analog ous result f or the re d giant is obtaine d by sc aling the result f or a white dw arf:
Significanc e
To es tima te the total p ower emit ted by a white dw arf, in principle , we could use Equa tion 6.7 . Ho wever, to find
its sur face are a, w e nee d to kno w the a verage radius , which is not giv en in this e xample . Theref ore, the
solution s tops here . The same is also tr ue for the re d giant s tar.
CHE CK Y OUR UNDER STANDING 6.2
An iron p oker is b eing he ated. As its temp erature rises , the p oker b egins to glo w—first dull re d, then bright re d,
then orang e, and then y ellow. Use either the blackb ody radia tion cur ve or W ien’s law to e xplain these chang es
in the c olor o f the glo w.
CHE CK Y OUR UNDER STANDING 6.36.5
6.6
6.7
6.8244 6 • Pho tons and Mat ter W aves
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Supp ose tha t two stars ,and radia te exactly the same total p ower. If the radius o f star is three times tha t of
star wha t is the ra tio o f the sur face temp eratures o f these s tars? Which one is hot ter?
The term “blackb ody” was c oine d by Gus tav R. Kirchho ff in 1862. The blackb ody radia tion cur ve was kno wn
experimentally , but its shap e elude d ph ysical explana tion until the y ear 1900. The ph ysical mo del o f a
blackb ody a t temp erature Tis tha t of the electroma gnetic w aves enclose d in a c avity (see Figure 6.2 ) and a t
thermo dynamic e quilibrium with the c avity w alls. The w aves c an e xchang e energ y with the w alls. The
objectiv e here is to find the energ y density dis tribution among v arious mo des o f vibra tion a t various
wavelengths (or fre quencies). In other w ords , we want to kno w ho w much energ y is c arrie d by a single
wavelength or a b and o f wavelengths . Onc e we kno w the energ y dis tribution , we can use s tandard s tatistical
metho ds (similar to those s tudie d in a previous chapter) to obtain the blackb ody radia tion cur ve, Stefan ’s law,
and W ien’s displac ement la w. When the ph ysical mo del is c orrect , the theoretic al pre dictions should b e the
same as the e xperimental cur ves.
In a clas sical appro ach to the blackb ody radia tion problem , in which radia tion is tre ated as w aves (as y ou ha ve
studie d in previous chapters), the mo des o f electroma gnetic w aves trapp ed in the c avity are in e quilibrium and
continually e xchang e their energies with the c avity w alls. There is no ph ysical re ason wh y a w ave should do
other wise: An y amount o f energ y can b e exchang ed, either b y being trans ferre d from the w ave to the ma terial
in the w all or b y being rec eived by the w ave from the ma terial in the w all. This clas sical picture is the b asis o f
the mo del dev elop ed by Lord Ra yleigh and , indep endently , by Sir J ames J eans. The result o f this clas sical
model f or blackb ody radia tion cur ves is kno wn as the Rayleigh– Jeans la w. Ho wever, as sho wn in Figure 6.6 ,
the Rayleigh– Jeans la wfails to c orrectly repro duce experimental results . In the limit o f shor t wavelengths , the
Rayleigh– Jeans la w pre dicts infinite radia tion intensity , which is inc onsis tent with the e xperimental results in
which radia tion intensity has finite v alues in the ultra violet region o f the sp ectr um. This div ergence between
the results o f clas sical theor y and e xperiments , which c ame to b e called the ultra violet c atastrophe , sho ws ho w
clas sical ph ysics fails to e xplain the mechanism o f blackb ody radia tion .
Figur e6.6 The ul traviolet catas trophe: The R ayleigh– Jeans la w does not e xplain the obser ved blackbody emis sion spectrum.
The blackb ody radia tion problem w as solv ed in 1900 b y Max Planck . Planck use d the same ide a as the
Rayleigh– Jeans mo del in the sense tha t he tre ated the electroma gnetic w aves b etween the w alls inside the
cavity clas sically, and as sume d tha t the radia tion is in e quilibrium with the c avity w alls. The inno vative ide a
that Planck intro duced in his mo del is the as sumption tha t the c avity radia tion origina tes from a tomic
oscilla tions inside the c avity w alls, and tha t these oscilla tions c an ha ve only discrete values o f energ y.
Theref ore, the radia tion trapp ed inside the c avity w alls c an e xchang e energ y with the w alls only in discrete
amounts . Planck ’s hypothesis o f discrete energ y values , which he c alledquanta , assumes tha t the oscilla tors
inside the c avity w alls ha vequant ized ener gies . This w as a brand new ide a tha t went b eyond the clas sical
physics o f the nineteenth c entur y because, as y ou le arne d in a previous chapter , in the clas sical picture , the
energ y of an oscilla tor c an tak e on an y continuous v alue . Planck as sume d tha t the energ y of an oscilla tor ( )
can ha ve only discrete , or quantiz ed, values:6.1 • Blackbody Radiation 245

InEqua tion 6.9 ,fis the fre quency o f Planck ’s oscilla tor. The na tural numb ernthat enumera tes these discrete
energies is c alled aquantum numb er. The ph ysical constant his calledPlanck ’s constant :
Each discrete energ y value c orresp onds to a quantum s tate of a Planck oscillator . Quantum s tates are
enumera ted by quantum numb ers. For e xample , when Planck ’s oscilla tor is in its firs t quantum s tate, its
energ y is when it is in the quantum s tate, its energ y is when it is in the
quantum s tate, and so on .
Note tha tEqua tion 6.9 shows tha t there are infinitely man y quantum s tates, which c an b e represente d as a
sequenc e {hf, 2hf, 3hf,…, ( n– 1) hf,nhf, (n+ 1) hf,…}. Each tw o consecutiv e quantum s tates in this se quenc e are
separated by an energ y jump , An oscilla tor in the w all c an rec eive energ y from the radia tion in the
cavity (a bsorption), or it c an giv e away energ y to the radia tion in the c avity (emis sion). The a bsorption pro cess
sends the oscilla tor to a higher quantum s tate, and the emis sion pro cess sends the oscilla tor to a lo wer
quantum s tate. Whichev er w ay this e xchang e of energ y goes, the smalles t amount o f energ y tha t can b e
exchang ed is hf. There is no upp er limit to ho w much energ y can b e exchang ed, but wha tever is e xchang ed
mus t be an integ er multiple o fhf. If the energ y packet do es not ha ve this e xact amount , it is neither a bsorb ed
nor emit ted at the w all o f the blackb ody.
Recall tha t the fre quency o f electroma gnetic radia tion is rela ted to its w avelength and to the sp eed of light b y
the fundamental rela tion This me ans tha t we can e xpres sEqua tion 6.10 equiv alently in terms o f
wavelength When include d in the c omputa tion o f the energ y density o f a blackb ody, Planck ’s hypothesis
gives the f ollowing theoretic al expres sion f or the p ower intensity o f emit ted radia tion p er unit w avelength:
where cis the sp eed of light in v acuum and is Boltzmann ’s constant , The
theoretic al formula e xpres sed in Equa tion 6.11 is calledPlanck ’s blackb ody radia tion la w. This la w is in
agreement with the e xperimental blackb ody radia tion cur ve (see Figure 6.7 ). In addition , Wien’s displac ement
law and Stefan ’s law can b oth b e deriv ed from Equa tion 6.11 . To deriv e Wien’s displac ement la w, we use
differential c alculus to find the maximum o f the radia tion intensity cur ve To deriv e Stefan ’s law and
find the v alue o f the Stefan–Boltzmann c onstant , we use integral c alculus and integra te to find the total
power radia ted by a blackb ody a t one temp erature in the entire sp ectr um o f wavelengths from to ∞
This deriv ation is left as an e xercise la ter in this chapter .6.9
6.10
Planck ’s Quantum Hypo thesis
Planck ’s hypothesis of ener gy quanta states tha t the amount o f energ y emit ted by the oscilla tor is c arrie d
by the quantum o f radia tion ,
6.11246 6 • Pho tons and Mat ter W aves
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Figur e6.7 Planck ’s theor etical r esul t (continuous cur ve) and the e xperimental blackbody r adiation cur ve (dots).
EXAMPLE 6.3
Planck ’s Quantum Oscil lator
A quantum oscilla tor in the c avity w all in Figure 6.2 is vibra ting a t a fre quency o f Calcula te the
spacing b etween its energ y lev els.
Strategy
Energ y states o f a quantum oscilla tor are giv en b yEqua tion 6.9 . The energ y sp acing is obtaine d by finding
the energ y diff erenc e between tw o adjac ent quantum s tates f or quantum numb ersn+ 1 and n.
Solution
We can subs titute the giv en fre quency and Planck ’s constant directly into the e qua tion:
Significanc e
Note tha t we do not sp ecify wha t kind o f ma terial w as use d to build the c avity. Here , a quantum oscilla tor is a
theoretic al mo del o f an a tom or molecule o f ma terial in the w all.
CHE CK Y OUR UNDER STANDING 6.4
A molecule is vibra ting a t a fre quency o f Wha t is the smalles t spacing b etween its vibra tional
energ y lev els?
EXAMPLE 6.4
Quantum Theor y Applied t o a Clas sical Oscil lator
A 1.0-k g mas s oscilla tes a t the end o f a spring with a spring c onstant o f 1000 N /m. The amplitude o f these
oscilla tions is 0.10 m . Use the c oncept o f quantiza tion to find the energ y sp acing f or this clas sical oscilla tor. Is
the energ y quantiza tion signific ant f or macrosc opic s ystems , such as this oscilla tor?
Strategy
We use Equa tion 6.10 as though the s ystem w ere a quantum oscilla tor, but with the fre quency fof the mas s
vibra ting on a spring . To ev alua te whether or not quantiza tion has a signific ant eff ect, we comp are the
quantum energ y sp acing with the macrosc opic total energ y of this clas sical oscilla tor.6.1 • Blackbody Radiation 247

Solution
For the spring c onstant , the fre quency fof the mas s, is
The energ y quantum tha t corresp onds to this fre quency is
When vibra tions ha ve amplitude the energ y of oscilla tions is
Significanc e
Thus , for a clas sical oscilla tor, we ha ve We see tha t the sep aration o f the energ y lev els is
imme asura bly small . Theref ore, for all practic al purp oses , the energ y of a clas sical oscilla tor tak es on
continuous v alues . This is wh y clas sical principles ma y be applie d to macrosc opic s ystems enc ountere d in
everyday life without los s of accuracy .
CHE CK Y OUR UNDER STANDING 6.5
Would the result in Example 6.4 be diff erent if the mas s were not 1.0 k g but a tin y mas s of 1.0 µg, and the
amplitude o f vibra tions w ere 0.10 µm?
When Planck firs t publishe d his result , the h ypothesis o f energ y quanta w as not tak en seriously b y the ph ysics
community b ecause it did not f ollow from an y es tablishe d ph ysics theor y at tha t time . It w as p erceived, even
by Planck himself, as a useful ma thema tical trick tha t led to a g ood theoretic al “fit ” to the e xperimental cur ve.
This p erception w as chang ed in 1905 when Eins tein publishe d his e xplana tion o f the photo electric eff ect, in
which he g ave Planck ’s energ y quantum a new me aning: tha t of a p article o f light .
6.2Photoelec tric Ef fect
Learning Objectiv es
By the end o f this section, y ou wil l be able t o:
•Describe phy sical char acteris tics o f the pho toelec tric e ffect
•Explain why the pho toelec tric e ffect canno t be e xplained b y classical phy sics
•Describe ho w Eins tein’s idea o f a par ticle o f radiation e xplains the pho toelec tric e ffect
When a metal sur face is e xposed to a mono chroma tic electroma gnetic w ave of sufficiently shor t wavelength
(or e quiv alently , above a threshold fre quency ), the incident radia tion is a bsorb ed and the e xposed sur face
emits electrons . This phenomenon is kno wn as the photo electric eff ect. Electrons tha t are emit ted in this
process are c alledphoto electrons .
The e xperimental setup to s tudy the photo electric eff ect is sho wn schema tically in Figure 6.8 . The targ et
material ser ves as the c athode, which b ecomes the emit ter o f photo electrons when it is illumina ted by
mono chroma tic radia tion . We call this electro de the photo electro de. Photo electrons are c ollecte d at the
ano de, which is k ept a t a higher p otential with resp ect to the c athode. The p otential diff erenc e between the
electro des c an b e incre ased or decre ased, or its p olarity c an b e rev erse d. The electro des are enclose d in an
evacua ted glas s tub e so tha t photo electrons do not lose their kinetic energ y on c ollisions with air molecules in
the sp ace between electro des.
When the targ et ma terial is not e xposed to radia tion , no current is regis tere d in this circuit b ecause the circuit
is brok en (note , there is a g ap b etween the electro des). B ut when the targ et ma terial is c onnecte d to the
negative terminal o f a b attery and e xposed to radia tion , a current is regis tere d in this circuit; this current is248 6 • Pho tons and Mat ter W aves
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

called the photo current . Supp ose tha t we no w rev erse the p otential diff erenc e between the electro des so tha t
the targ et ma terial no w connects with the p ositiv e terminal o f a b attery, and then w e slo wly incre ase the
volta ge. The photo current gradually dies out and ev entually s tops flo wing c ompletely a t some v alue o f this
reverse d volta ge. The p otential diff erenc e at which the photo current s tops flo wing is c alled the stopping
potent ial.
Figur e6.8 An e xperimental setup t o study the phot oelectric eff ect. The anode and cathode ar e enclosed in an e vacuat ed glas s tube . The
voltmet er measur es the electric pot ential diff erence betw een the electr odes , and the ammet er measur es the phot ocurr ent. The incident
radiation is monochr omatic.
Char acteris tics o f the Pho toelec tric Ef fect
The photo electric eff ect has three imp ortant characteris tics tha t cannot b e explaine d by clas sical ph ysics: (1)
the a bsenc e of a la g time , (2) the indep endenc e of the kinetic energ y of photo electrons on the intensity o f
incident radia tion , and (3) the presenc e of a cut -off fre quency . Let ’s examine e ach o f these characteris tics.
The absence o f lag time
When radia tion s trikes the targ et ma terial in the electro de, electrons are emit ted almos t ins tantaneously , even
at very low intensities o f incident radia tion . This a bsenc e of lag time c ontradicts our unders tanding b ased on
clas sical ph ysics . Clas sical ph ysics pre dicts tha t for lo w-energ y radia tion , it w ould tak e signific ant time b efore
irradia ted electrons c ould g ain sufficient energ y to le ave the electro de sur face; ho wever, such an energ y
buildup is not obser ved.
The intensit y of incident r adiation and the kine tic ener gy of pho toelec trons
Typic al experimental cur ves are sho wn in Figure 6.9 , in which the photo current is plot ted versus the applie d
potential diff erenc e between the electro des. For the p ositiv e potential diff erenc e, the current s teadily gro ws
until it re aches a pla teau. Furthering the p otential incre ase b eyond this p oint do es not incre ase the
photo current a t all . A higher intensity o f radia tion pro duces a higher v alue o f photo current . For the neg ative
potential diff erenc e, as the a bsolute v alue o f the p otential diff erenc e incre ases , the v alue o f the photo current
decre ases and b ecomes z ero a t the s topping p otential . For an y intensity o f incident radia tion , whether the
intensity is high or lo w, the v alue o f the s topping p otential alw ays stays at one v alue .6.2 • Pho toelec tric Ef fect 249

To unders tand wh y this result is unusual from the p oint o f view o f clas sical ph ysics , we firs t ha ve to analyz e the
energ y of photo electrons . A photo electron tha t leaves the sur face has kinetic energ yK. It g aine d this energ y
from the incident electroma gnetic w ave. In the sp ace between the electro des, a photo electron mo ves in the
electric p otential and its energ y chang es b y the amount where is the p otential diff erenc e and
Because no f orces are present but electric f orce, by applying the w ork-energ y theorem , we obtain the energ y
balanc e for the photo electron , where is the chang e in the photo electron ’s kinetic energ y.
When the s topping p otential is applie d, the photo electron loses its initial kinetic energ y and c omes
to res t. Thus , its energ y balanc e becomes so tha t In the presenc e of the
stopping p otential , the larg est kinetic energ y that a photo electron c an ha ve is its initial kinetic energ y,
which it has a t the sur face of the photo electro de. Theref ore, the larg est kinetic energ y of photo electrons c an b e
directly me asure d by me asuring the s topping p otential:
At this p oint w e can see where the clas sical theor y is a t odds with the e xperimental results . In clas sical theor y,
the photo electron a bsorbs electroma gnetic energ y in a c ontinuous w ay; this me ans tha t when the incident
radia tion has a high intensity , the kinetic energ y in Equa tion 6.12 is expecte d to b e high . Similarly , when the
radia tion has a lo w intensity , the kinetic energ y is e xpecte d to b e low. But the e xperiment sho ws tha t the
maximum kinetic energ y of photo electrons is indep endent o f the light intensity .
Figur e6.9 The det ected phot ocurr ent plot ted v ersus the applied pot ential diff erence sho ws that f or an y int ensity o f incident r adiation,
whether the int ensity is high (upper cur ve) or lo w (lo wer cur ve), the v alue o f the s topping pot ential is al ways the same .
The pr esence o f a cut -off frequency
For an y metal sur face, there is a minimum fre quency o f incident radia tion b elow which photo current do es not
occur. The v alue o f this cut-off fre quency for the photo electric eff ect is a ph ysical prop erty of the metal:
Different ma terials ha ve diff erent v alues o f cut -off fre quency . Exp erimental da ta sho w a typic al line ar trend
(see Figure 6.10 ). The kinetic energ y of photo electrons a t the sur face gro ws line arly with the incre asing
frequency o f incident radia tion . Me asurements f or all metal sur faces giv e line ar plots with one slop e. None o f
these obser ved phenomena is in ac cord with the clas sical unders tanding o f na ture . According to the clas sical
description , the kinetic energ y of photo electrons should not dep end on the fre quency o f incident radia tion a t
all, and there should b e no cut -off fre quency . Ins tead, in the clas sical picture , electrons rec eive energ y from
the incident electroma gnetic w ave in a c ontinuous w ay, and the amount o f energ y the y rec eive dep ends only
on the intensity o f the incident light and nothing else . So in the clas sical unders tanding , as long as the light is
shining , the photo electric eff ect is e xpecte d to c ontinue .6.12250 6 • Pho tons and Mat ter W aves
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Figur e6.10 Kinetic ener gy of phot oelectr ons at the sur face versus the fr equency o f incident r adiation. The phot oelectric eff ect can onl y
occur abo ve the cut -off frequency Measur ements f or al l metal sur faces giv e linear plots with one slope . Each metal sur face has its o wn
cut-off frequency .
The W ork F unction
The photo electric eff ect w as e xplaine d in 1905 b y A.Eins tein . Eins tein re asone d tha t if Planck ’s hypothesis
about energ y quanta w as c orrect f or describing the energ y exchang e between electroma gnetic radia tion and
cavity w alls, it should also w ork to describ e energ y absorption from electroma gnetic radia tion b y the sur face of
a photo electro de. He p ostula ted tha t an electroma gnetic w ave carries its energ y in discrete p ackets. Eins tein ’s
postula te goes b eyond Planck ’s hypothesis b ecause it s tates tha t the light itself c onsis ts of energ y quanta. In
other w ords , it s tates tha t electroma gnetic w aves are quantiz ed.
In Eins tein ’s appro ach, a b eam o f mono chroma tic light o f fre quency fis made o f photons . Aphoton is a
particle o f light . Each photon mo ves a t the sp eed of light and c arries an energ y quantum A photon ’s energ y
dep ends only on its fre quency f. Explicitly , the ener gy of a photon is
where is Planck ’s constant . In the photo electric eff ect, photons arriv e at the metal sur face and e ach photon
gives a wayallof its energ y to only one electron on the metal sur face. This trans fer o f energ y from photon to
electron is o f the “ all or nothing ” typ e, and there are no fractional trans fers in which a photon w ould lose only
part of its energ y and sur vive. The es senc e of aquantum phenomenon is either a photon trans fers its entire
energ y and c eases to e xist or there is no trans fer a t all . This is in c ontras t with the clas sical picture , where
fractional energ y trans fers are p ermit ted. Ha ving this quantum unders tanding , the energ y balanc e for an
electron on the sur face tha t rec eives the energ y from a photon is
where is the kinetic energ y, giv en b yEqua tion 6.12 , tha t an electron has a t the v ery ins tant it g ets
detache d from the sur face. In this energ y balanc e equa tion ,is the energ y nee ded to detach a photo electron
from the sur face. This energ y is called the work funct ion of the metal . Each metal has its characteris tic w ork
function , as illus trated in Table 6.1 . To obtain the kinetic energ y of photo electrons a t the sur face, we simply
invert the energ y balanc e equa tion and use Equa tion 6.13 to expres s the energ y of the a bsorb ed photon . This
gives us the e xpres sion f or the kinetic energ y of photo electrons , which e xplicitly dep ends on the fre quency o f
incident radia tion:
This e qua tion has a simple ma thema tical form but its ph ysics is pro found . We can no w ela borate on the
physical me aning b ehind Equa tion 6.14 .6.13
6.146.2 • Pho toelec tric Ef fect 251

Typical V alues o f the W ork F unction f or Some C ommon Me tals
Metal (eV)
Na 2.46
Al 4.08
Pb 4.14
Zn 4.31
Fe 4.50
Cu 4.70
Ag 4.73
Pt 6.35
Table 6.1
In Eins tein ’s interpreta tion , interactions tak e plac e between individual electrons and individual photons . The
absenc e of a la g time me ans tha t these one -on-one interactions o ccur ins tantaneously . This interaction time
cannot b e incre ased by lowering the light intensity . The light intensity c orresp onds to the numb er o f photons
arriving a t the metal sur face per unit time . Even a t very low light intensities , the photo electric eff ect s till
occurs b ecause the interaction is b etween one electron and one photon . As long as there is a t least one photon
with enough energ y to trans fer it to a b ound electron , a photo electron will app ear on the sur face of the
photo electro de.
The e xistenc e of the cut -off fre quency for the photo electric eff ect f ollows from Equa tion 6.14 because the
kinetic energ y of the photo electron c an tak e only p ositiv e values . This me ans tha t there mus t be some
threshold fre quency f or which the kinetic energ y is z ero, In this w ay, we obtain the e xplicit
formula f or cut -off fre quency:
Cut-off fre quency dep ends only on the w ork function o f the metal and is in direct prop ortion to it . When the
work function is larg e (when electrons are b ound fas t to the metal sur face), the energ y of the threshold photon
mus t be larg e to pro duce a photo electron , and then the c orresp onding threshold fre quency is larg e. Photons
with fre quencies larg er than the threshold fre quency always pro duce photo electrons b ecause the y ha ve
Photons with fre quencies smaller than do not ha ve enough energ y to pro duce photo electrons .
Theref ore, when incident radia tion has a fre quency b elow the cut -off fre quency , the photo electric eff ect is not
obser ved. Bec ause fre quency fand w avelength of electroma gnetic w aves are rela ted by the fundamental
rela tion (where is the sp eed of light in v acuum), the cut -off fre quency has its c orresp onding cut-off
wavelength
In this e qua tion , Our obser vations c an b e res tated in the f ollowing e quiv alent w ay: When
the incident radia tion has w avelengths long er than the cut -off wavelength , the photo electric eff ect do es not
occur.6.15
6.16252 6 • Pho tons and Mat ter W aves
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

EXAMPLE 6.5
Pho toelectric Ef fect f or Sil ver
Radia tion with w avelength 300 nm is incident on a silv er sur face. Will photo electrons b e obser ved?
Strategy
Photo electrons c an b e ejecte d from the metal sur face only when the incident radia tion has a shor ter
wavelength than the cut -off wavelength . The w ork function o f silv er is (Table 6.1 ). To mak e the
estima te, we use Equa tion 6.16 .
Solution
The threshold w avelength f or obser ving the photo electric eff ect in silv er is
The incident radia tion has w avelength 300 nm , which is long er than the cut -off wavelength; theref ore,
photo electrons are not obser ved.
Significanc e
If the photo electro de w ere made o f sodium ins tead o f silv er, the cut -off wavelength w ould b e 504 nm and
photo electrons w ould b e obser ved.
Equa tion 6.14 in Eins tein ’s mo del tells us tha t the maximum kinetic energ y of photo electrons is a line ar
function o f the fre quency o f incident radia tion , which is illus trated in Figure 6.10 . For an y metal , the slop e of
this plot has a v alue o f Planck ’s constant . The interc ept with the -axis giv es us a v alue o f the w ork
function tha t is characteris tic f or the metal . On the other hand , can b e directly me asure d in the
experiment b y me asuring the v alue o f the s topping p otential (see Equa tion 6.12 ) at which the
photo current s tops . These direct me asurements allo w us to determine e xperimentally the v alue o f Planck ’s
constant , as w ell as w ork functions o f ma terials .
Eins tein ’s mo del also giv es a s traightf orward e xplana tion f or the photo current v alues sho wn in Figure 6.9 . For
example , doubling the intensity o f radia tion transla tes to doubling the numb er o f photons tha t strike the
surface per unit time . The larg er the numb er o f photons , the larg er is the numb er o f photo electrons , which
leads to a larg er photo current in the circuit . This is ho w radia tion intensity a ffects the photo current . The
photo current mus t reach a pla teau at some v alue o f potential diff erenc e because, in unit time , the numb er o f
photo electrons is e qual to the numb er o f incident photons and the numb er o f incident photons do es not
dep end on the applie d potential diff erenc e at all , but only on the intensity o f incident radia tion . The s topping
potential do es not chang e with the radia tion intensity b ecause the kinetic energ y of photo electrons (see
Equa tion 6.14 ) do es not dep end on the radia tion intensity .
EXAMPLE 6.6
Work F unction and Cut -Off Frequency
When a 180-nm light is use d in an e xperiment with an unkno wn metal , the me asure d photo current drops to
zero a t potential – 0.80 V . Determine the w ork function o f the metal and its cut -off fre quency f or the
photo electric eff ect.
Strategy
To find the cut -off fre quency we use Equa tion 6.15 , but firs t we mus t find the w ork function To find we
use Equa tion 6.12 and Equa tion 6.14 . Photo current drops to z ero a t the s topping v alue o f potential , so w e
identif y6.2 • Pho toelec tric Ef fect 253

Solution
We use Equa tion 6.12 to find the kinetic energ y of the photo electrons:
Now w e solv eEqua tion 6.14 for
Finally , we use Equa tion 6.15 to find the cut -off fre quency:
Significanc e
In calcula tions lik e the one sho wn in this e xample , it is c onvenient to use Planck ’s constant in the units o f
and e xpres s all energies in e V ins tead o f joules .
EXAMPLE 6.7
The Pho ton Ener gy and Kinetic Ener gy of Pho toelectr ons
A 430-nm violet light is incident on a c alcium photo electro de with a w ork function o f 2.71 e V.
Find the energ y of the incident photons and the maximum kinetic energ y of ejecte d electrons .
Strategy
The energ y of the incident photon is where w e use To obtain the maximum energ y of
the ejecte d electrons , we use Equa tion 6.16 .
Solution
Significanc e
In this e xperimental setup , photo electrons s top flo wing a t the s topping p otential o f 0.17 V .
CHE CK Y OUR UNDER STANDING 6.6
A yellow 589-nm light is incident on a sur face whose w ork function is 1.20 e V. Wha t is the s topping p otential?
Wha t is the cut -off wavelength?
CHE CK Y OUR UNDER STANDING 6.7
Cut-off fre quency f or the photo electric eff ect in some ma terials is When the incident light has a
frequency o f the s topping p otential is me asure d as – 0.16 V . Estima te a v alue o f Planck ’s
constant from these da ta (in units and ) and determine the p ercenta ge error o f your es tima tion .
6.3The C omp ton Ef fect
Learning Objectiv es
By the end o f this section, y ou wil l be able t o:
•Describe C omp ton’s experiment
•Explain the C omp ton w avelength shif t
•Describe ho w experiments with X -rays confirm the par ticle natur e of radiation254 6 • Pho tons and Mat ter W aves
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Two of Eins tein ’s influential ide as intro duced in 1905 w ere the theor y of special rela tivity and the c oncept o f a
light quantum , which w e no w call a photon . Beyond 1905, Eins tein w ent fur ther to sugg est tha t freely
prop agating electroma gnetic w aves c onsis ted of photons tha t are p articles o f light in the same sense tha t
electrons or other mas sive particles are p articles o f ma tter. A b eam o f mono chroma tic light o f wavelength (or
equiv alently , of fre quency f) can b e seen either as a clas sical w ave or as a c ollection o f photons tha t tra vel in a
vacuum with one sp eed,c(the sp eed of light), and all c arrying the same energ y, This ide a pro ved
useful f or e xplaining the interactions o f light with p articles o f ma tter.
Momentum o f a Pho ton
Unlik e a p article o f ma tter tha t is characteriz ed by its res t mas s a photon is mas sles s. In a v acuum , unlik e a
particle o f ma tter tha t ma y vary its sp eed but c annot re ach the sp eed of light , a photon tra vels a t only one
speed, which is e xactly the sp eed of light . From the p oint o f view o f Newtonian clas sical mechanics , these tw o
characteris tics imply tha t a photon should not e xist at all . For e xample , how can w e find the line ar momentum
or kinetic energ y of a b ody whose mas s is z ero? This app arent p arado x vanishes if w e describ e a photon as a
rela tivis tic p article . According to the theor y of special rela tivity , any particle in na ture ob eys the rela tivis tic
energ y equa tion
This rela tion c an also b e applie d to a photon . InEqua tion 6.17 ,Eis the total energ y of a p article ,pis its line ar
momentum , and is its res t mas s. For a photon , we simply set in this e qua tion . This le ads to the
expres sion f or the momentum of a photon
Here the photon ’s energ y is the same as tha t of a light quantum o f fre quency f, which w e intro duced to
explain the photo electric eff ect:
The w ave rela tion tha t connects fre quency fwith w avelength and sp eedcalso holds f or photons:
Theref ore, a photon c an b e equiv alently characteriz ed by either its energ y and w avelength , or its fre quency
and momentum .Equa tion 6.19 and Equa tion 6.20 can b e combine d into the e xplicit rela tion b etween a
photon ’s momentum and its w avelength:
Notice tha t this e qua tion giv es us only the ma gnitude o f the photon ’s momentum and c ontains no inf orma tion
about the direction in which the photon is mo ving . To include the direction , it is cus tomar y to write the
photon ’s momentum as a v ector:
InEqua tion 6.22 ,ℏ is the reduc ed Planck ’s cons tant (pronounc ed “h-b ar”), which is jus t Planck ’s
constant divide d by the factor Vector is called the “ wave vector ” or prop agation v ector (the direction in
which a photon is mo ving ). The prop agation v ector shows the direction o f the photon ’s line ar momentum
vector . The ma gnitude o f the w ave vector is and is c alled the wave numb er. Notice tha t this6.17
6.18
6.19
6.20
6.21
ℏ 6.226.3 • The C omp ton Ef fect 255

equa tion do es not intro duce an y new ph ysics . We can v erify tha t the ma gnitude o f the v ector in Equa tion 6.22
is the same as tha t giv en b yEqua tion 6.18 .
The C omp ton Ef fect
The Compton eff ectis the term use d for an unusual result obser ved when X -rays are sc attere d on some
materials . By clas sical theor y, when an electroma gnetic w ave is sc attere d off atoms , the w avelength o f the
scattere d radia tion is e xpecte d to b e the same as the w avelength o f the incident radia tion . Contrar y to this
prediction o f clas sical ph ysics , obser vations sho w tha t when X -rays are sc attere d off some ma terials , such as
graphite , the sc attere d X-rays ha ve diff erent w avelengths from the w avelength o f the incident X -rays. This
clas sically une xplaina ble phenomenon w as s tudie d experimentally b y Ar thur H. Compton and his
collaborators , and C ompton g ave its e xplana tion in 1923.
To explain the shift in w avelengths me asure d in the e xperiment , Compton use d Eins tein ’s ide a of light as a
particle . The C ompton eff ect has a v ery imp ortant plac e in the his tory of ph ysics b ecause it sho ws tha t
electroma gnetic radia tion c annot b e explaine d as a purely w ave phenomenon . The e xplana tion o f the C ompton
effect g ave a c onvincing argument to the ph ysics c ommunity tha t electroma gnetic w aves c an indee d behave
like a s tream o f photons , which plac ed the c oncept o f a photon on firm ground .
The schema tics o f Compton ’s experimental setup are sho wn in Figure 6.11 . The ide a of the e xperiment is
straightf orward: Mono chroma tic X -rays with w avelength are incident on a sample o f graphite (the “ targ et”),
where the y interact with a toms inside the sample; the y later emerg e as sc attere d X-rays with w avelength A
detector plac ed behind the targ et can me asure the intensity o f radia tion sc attere d in an y direction with
resp ect to the direction o f the incident X -ray beam. This scattering angle ,is the angle b etween the direction
of the sc attere d beam and the direction o f the incident b eam. In this e xperiment , we kno w the intensity and
the w avelength of the inc oming (incident) b eam; and f or a giv en sc attering angle we me asure the intensity
and the w avelength of the out going (sc attere d) b eam. Typic al results o f these me asurements are sho wn in
Figure 6.12 , where the x-axis is the w avelength o f the sc attere d X-rays and the y-axis is the intensity o f the
scattere d X-rays, me asure d for diff erent sc attering angles (indic ated on the graphs). F or all sc attering angles
(except f or we me asure tw o intensity p eaks. One p eak is lo cated at the w avelength which is the
wavelength o f the incident b eam. The other p eak is lo cated at some other w avelength , The tw o peaks are
separated by which dep ends on the sc attering angle of the out going b eam (in the direction o f
obser vation). The sep aration is called the Compton shift .
Figur e6.11 Experimental setup f or studying Comp ton scat tering .256 6 • Pho tons and Mat ter W aves
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Figur e6.12 Experimental data sho w the Comp ton eff ect f or X-rays scat tering o ff gr aphit e at v arious angles: The int ensity o f the scat tered
beam has tw o peak s. One peak appears at the w avelength of the incident r adiation and the sec ond peak appears at w avelength The
separ ation betw een the peak s depends on the scat tering angle which is the ang ular position o f the det ector in Figure 6.11 . The
experimental data in this fig ure are plot ted in arbitr ary units so that the height o f the pr ofile r eflects the int ensity o f the scat tered beam
above back ground noise .
Comp ton Shif t
As giv en b y Compton , the e xplana tion o f the C ompton shift is tha t in the targ et ma terial , graphite , valenc e
electrons are lo osely b ound in the a toms and b ehave lik e free electrons . Compton as sume d tha t the incident X -
ray radia tion is a s tream o f photons . An inc oming photon in this s tream c ollides with a v alenc e electron in the
graphite targ et. In the c ourse o f this c ollision , the inc oming photon trans fers some p art of its energ y and
momentum to the targ et electron and le aves the sc ene as a sc attere d photon . This mo del e xplains in
qualita tive terms wh y the sc attere d radia tion has a long er w avelength than the incident radia tion . Put simply , a
photon tha t has los t some o f its energ y emerg es as a photon with a lo wer fre quency , or e quiv alently , with a
long er w avelength . To sho w tha t his mo del w as c orrect , Compton use d it to deriv e the e xpres sion f or the
Compton shift . In his deriv ation , he as sume d tha t both photon and electron are rela tivis tic p articles and tha t
the c ollision ob eys tw o commonsense principles: (1) the c onser vation o f line ar momentum and (2) the
conser vation o f total rela tivis tic energ y.
In the f ollowing deriv ation o f the C ompton shift , and denote the energ y and momentum , resp ectiv ely,
of an incident photon with fre quency f. The photon c ollides with a rela tivis tic electron a t res t, which me ans
that imme diately b efore the c ollision , the electron ’s energ y is entirely its res t mas s energ y, Imme diately
after the c ollision , the electron has energ yEand momentum both o f which sa tisfyEqua tion 6.19 .
Imme diately a fter the c ollision , the out going photon has energ y momentum and fre quency The
direction o f the incident photon is horiz ontal from left to right , and the direction o f the out going photon is a t
the angle as illus trated in Figure 6.11 . The sc attering angle is the angle b etween the momentum v ectors
and and w e can write their sc alar pro duct:
Following C ompton ’s argument , we as sume tha t the c olliding photon and electron f orm an isola ted system .
This as sumption is v alid f or w eakly b ound electrons tha t, to a g ood appro xima tion , can b e tre ated as free
particles . Our firs t equa tion is the c onser vation o f energ y for the photon-electron s ystem:
The left side o f this e qua tion is the energ y of the s ystem a t the ins tant imme diately b efore the c ollision , and the
right side o f the e qua tion is the energ y of the s ystem a t the ins tant imme diately a fter the c ollision . Our sec ond
equa tion is the c onser vation o f line ar momentum f or the photon– electron s ystem where the electron is a t res t
at the ins tant imme diately b efore the c ollision:6.23
6.24
6.256.3 • The C omp ton Ef fect 257

The left side o f this e qua tion is the momentum o f the s ystem right b efore the c ollision , and the right side o f the
equa tion is the momentum o f the s ystem right a fter c ollision . The entire ph ysics o f Compton sc attering is
containe d in these three prec eding e qua tions ––the remaining p art is alg ebra. A t this p oint , we could jump to
the c oncluding f ormula f or the C ompton shift , but it is b eneficial to highlight the main alg ebraic s teps tha t lead
to C ompton ’s formula, which w e giv e here as f ollows.
We start with re arranging the terms in Equa tion 6.24 and squaring it:
In the ne xt step, we subs titute Equa tion 6.19 for simplif y, and divide b oth sides b y to obtain
Now w e can use Equa tion 6.21 to expres s this f orm o f the energ y equa tion in terms o f momenta. The result is
To elimina te we turn to the momentum e qua tion Equa tion 6.25 , rearrang e its terms , and square it to obtain
The pro duct o f the momentum v ectors is giv en b yEqua tion 6.23 . When w e subs titute this result f or in
Equa tion 6.26 , we obtain the energ y equa tion tha t contains the sc attering angle
With fur ther alg ebra, this result c an b e simplifie d to
Now rec allEqua tion 6.21 and write: and When these rela tions are subs titute d into
Equa tion 6.27 , we obtain the rela tion f or the C ompton shift:
The factor is called the Compton w avelength of the electron:
Denoting the shift as the c oncluding result c an b e rewrit ten as
This f ormula f or the C ompton shift describ es outs tandingly w ell the e xperimental results sho wn in Figure
6.12 . Scattering da ta me asure d for molyb denum , graphite , calcite , and man y other targ et ma terials are in
accord with this theoretic al result . The nonshifte d peak sho wn in Figure 6.12 is due to photon c ollisions with
tightly b ound inner electrons in the targ et ma terial . Photons tha t collide with the inner electrons o f the targ et
atoms in fact c ollide with the entire a tom . In this e xtreme c ase, the res t mas s in Equa tion 6.29 mus t be
chang ed to the res t mas s of the a tom . This typ e of shift is f our orders o f ma gnitude smaller than the shift
caused by collisions with electrons and is so small tha t it c an b e neglecte d.
Compton sc attering is an e xample o finelas tic sc attering , in which the sc attere d radia tion has a long er
wavelength than the w avelength o f the incident radia tion . In to day’s usa ge, the term “ Compton sc attering ” is
used for the inelas tic sc attering o f photons b y free , charg ed particles . In C ompton sc attering , tre ating photons
as p articles with momenta tha t can b e trans ferre d to charg ed particles pro vides the theoretic al background to6.26
6.27
6.28
6.29
6.30258 6 • Pho tons and Mat ter W aves
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

explain the w avelength shifts me asure d in e xperiments; this is the evidenc e tha t radia tion c onsis ts of photons .
EXAMPLE 6.8
Comp ton Sca ttering
An incident 71-pm X -ray is incident on a c alcite targ et. Find the w avelength o f the X -ray sc attere d at a
angle . Wha t is the larg est shift tha t can b e expecte d in this e xperiment?
Strategy
To find the w avelength o f the sc attere d X-ray, firs t we mus t find the C ompton shift f or the giv en sc attering
angle , We use Equa tion 6.30 . Then w e add this shift to the incident w avelength to obtain the sc attere d
wavelength . The larg est Compton shift o ccurs a t the angle when has the larg est value , which is f or
the angle
Solution
The shift a t is
This giv es the sc attere d wavelength:
The larg est shift is
Significanc e
The larg est shift in w avelength is detecte d for the b acksc attere d radia tion; ho wever, mos t of the photons from
the incident b eam p ass through the targ et and only a small fraction o f photons g ets b acksc attere d (typic ally,
less than 5%). Theref ore, these me asurements re quire highly sensitiv e detectors .
CHE CK Y OUR UNDER STANDING 6.8
An incident 71-pm X -ray is incident on a c alcite targ et. Find the w avelength o f the X -ray sc attere d at a
angle . Wha t is the smalles t shift tha t can b e expecte d in this e xperiment?
6.4Bohr ’s Model o f the Hy drogen A tom
Learning Objectiv es
By the end o f this section, y ou wil l be able t o:
•Explain the dif ference be tween the absorp tion spec trum and the emission spec trum o f radiation emit ted b y
atoms
•Describe the Ruther ford gold f oil experiment and the disco very of the atomic nucleus
•Explain the atomic s tructure of hydrogen
•Describe the pos tulates o f the early quantum theor y for the hy drogen atom
•Summariz e how Bohr ’s quantum model o f the hy drogen atom e xplains the r adiation spec trum o f atomic
hydrogen
Historic ally, Bohr ’s mo del o f the h ydrog en a tom is the v ery firs t mo del o f atomic s tructure tha t correctly
explaine d the radia tion sp ectra o f atomic h ydrog en. The mo del has a sp ecial plac e in the his tory of ph ysics
because it intro duced an e arly quantum theor y, which brought a bout new dev elopments in scientific thought
and la ter culmina ted in the dev elopment o f quantum mechanics . To unders tand the sp ecifics o f Bohr ’s mo del,
we mus t firs t review the nineteenth-c entur y disc overies tha t prompte d its f ormula tion .
When w e use a prism to analyz e white light c oming from the sun , sev eral dark lines in the solar sp ectr um are6.4 • Bohr ’s Model o f the Hy drogen A tom 259

obser ved (Figure 6.13 ). Solar a bsorption lines are c alledFraunhof er lines after J oseph v onFraunho fer, who
accura tely me asure d their w avelengths . During 1854–1861, Gus tav Kirchho ff and R obert Bunsen disc overed
that for the v arious chemic al elements , the line emis sion sp ectr um of an element e xactly ma tches its line
absorpt ion sp ectr um. The diff erenc e between the a bsorption sp ectr um and the emis sion sp ectr um is
explaine d in Figure 6.14 . An a bsorption sp ectr um is obser ved when light p asses through a g as. This sp ectr um
app ears as black lines tha t occur only a t certain w avelengths on the b ackground o f the c ontinuous sp ectr um o f
white light ( Figure 6.13 ). The mis sing w avelengths tell us which w avelengths o f the radia tion are a bsorb ed by
the g as. The emis sion sp ectr um is obser ved when light is emit ted by a g as. This sp ectr um is seen as c olor ful
lines on the black b ackground (see Figure 6.15 and Figure 6.16 ). Positions o f the emis sion lines tell us which
wavelengths o f the radia tion are emit ted by the g as. Each chemic al element has its o wn characteris tic emis sion
spectr um. For e ach element , the p ositions o f its emis sion lines are e xactly the same as the p ositions o f its
absorption lines . This me ans tha t atoms o f a sp ecific element a bsorb radia tion only a t specific w avelengths
and radia tion tha t do es not ha ve these w avelengths is not a bsorb ed by the element a t all . This also me ans tha t
the radia tion emit ted by atoms o f each element has e xactly the same w avelengths as the radia tion the y absorb .
Figur e6.13 In the solar emis sion spectrum in the visible r ange from 380 nm t o 710 nm, F raunho fer lines ar e obser ved as v ertical black
lines at specific spectr al positions in the c ontinuous spectrum. Highl y sensitiv e modern ins truments obser ve thousands o f such lines .
Figur e6.14 Obser vation o f line spectr a: (a) setup t o obser ve absorp tion lines; (b) setup t o obser ve emis sion lines . (a) Whit e light pas ses
through a c old g as that is c ontained in a glas s flask. A prism is used t o separ ate wavelengths o f the pas sed light. In the spectrum o f the
passed light, some w avelengths ar e mis sing , which ar e seen as black absorp tion lines in the c ontinuous spectrum on the vie wing scr een.
(b) A g as is c ontained in a glas s dischar ge tube that has electr odes at its ends . At a high pot ential diff erence betw een the electr odes , the
gas glo ws and the light emit ted fr om the g as pas ses thr ough the prism that separ ates its w avelengths . In the spectrum o f the emit ted light,
only specific w avelengths ar e present, which ar e seen as c olorful emis sion lines on the scr een.
Figur e6.15 The emis sion spectrum o f atomic h ydrogen: The spectr al positions o f emis sion lines ar e char acteristic for hydrogen at oms .
(credit: “Merik anto”/Wikimedia Commons)260 6 • Pho tons and Mat ter W aves
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Figur e6.16 The emis sion spectrum o f atomic ir on: The spectr al positions o f emis sion lines ar e char acteristic for ir on at oms .
Emis sion sp ectra o f the elements ha ve comple x structures; the y become ev en more c omple x for elements with
higher a tomic numb ers. The simples t spectr um, sho wn in Figure 6.15 , belongs to the h ydrog en a tom . Only
four lines are visible to the human e ye. As y ou re ad from right to left in Figure 6.15 , these lines are: re d (656
nm), c alled the H- line; aqua (486 nm), blue (434 nm), and violet (410 nm). The lines with w avelengths shor ter
than 400 nm app ear in the ultra violet p art of the sp ectr um ( Figure 6.15 , far left) and are in visible to the human
eye. There are infinitely man y invisible sp ectral lines in the series f or h ydrog en.
An empiric al formula to describ e the p ositions ( wavelengths) of the h ydrog en emis sion lines in this series
was disc overed in 1885 b y Johann Balmer . It is kno wn as the Balmer f ormula :
The c onstant is called the Rydberg cons tant f or h ydrog en. InEqua tion 6.31 , the
positiv e integ erntakes on v alues for the f our visible lines in this series . The series o f emis sion
lines giv en b y the Balmer f ormula is c alled the Balmer series for h ydrog en. Other emis sion lines o f hydrog en
that were disc overed in the tw entieth c entur y are describ ed by the Rydberg formula , which summariz es all o f
the e xperimental da ta:
When the series o f spectral lines is c alled the Lyman series . When the series is c alled the
Balmer series , and in this c ase, the R ydberg f ormula c oincides with the Balmer f ormula. When the
series is c alled the Paschen series . When the series is c alled the Brack ett series . When the
series is c alled the Pfund series . When we ha ve the Humphre ys series . As y ou ma y gues s, there are
infinitely man y such sp ectral b ands in the sp ectr um o f hydrog en b ecause can b e an y positiv e integ er
numb er.
The R ydberg f ormula f or h ydrog en giv es the e xact p ositions o f the sp ectral lines as the y are obser ved in a
laboratory; ho wever, at the b eginning o f the tw entieth c entur y, nob ody c ould e xplain wh y it w orked so w ell. The
Rydberg f ormula remaine d une xplaine d until the firs t suc cessful mo del o f the h ydrog en a tom w as prop osed in
1913.
EXAMPLE 6.9
Limits o f the Balmer Series
Calcula te the long est and the shor test wavelengths in the Balmer series .
Strategy
We can use either the Balmer f ormula or the R ydberg f ormula. The long est wavelength is obtaine d when
is larg est, which is when because for the Balmer series . The smalles t wavelength is
obtaine d when is smalles t, which is when ∞6.31
6.326.4 • Bohr ’s Model o f the Hy drogen A tom 261

Solution
The long-w ave limit:
The shor t-wave limit:
Significanc e
Note tha t there are infinitely man y sp ectral lines lying b etween these tw o limits .
CHE CK Y OUR UNDER STANDING 6.9
Wha t are the limits o f the L yman series? C an y ou see these sp ectral lines?
The k ey to unlo cking the m ystery of atomic sp ectra is in unders tanding a tomic s tructure . Scientis ts ha ve long
kno wn tha t ma tter is made o f atoms . According to nineteenth-c entur y scienc e, atoms are the smalles t
indivisible quantities o f ma tter. This scientific b elief w as sha ttere d by a series o f groundbre aking e xperiments
that pro ved the e xistenc e of sub atomic p articles , such as electrons , protons , and neutrons .
The electron w as disc overed and identifie d as the smalles t quantity o f electric charg e by J.J.Thomson in 1897
in his c athode ra y experiments , also kno wn as β -ray experiments: A β-rayis a b eam o f electrons . In 1904,
Thomson prop osed the firs t mo del o f atomic s tructure , kno wn as the “plum pudding ” mo del, in which an a tom
consis ted of an unkno wn p ositiv ely charg ed ma tter with neg ative electrons emb edde d in it lik e plums in a
pudding . Around 1900, E. Ruther ford, and indep endently , Paul Ulrich V illard , clas sifie d all radia tion kno wn a t
that time as -rays,β-rays, and γ-rays(aγ-ray is a b eam o f highly energ etic photons). In 1907, R uther ford and
Thomas R oyds use d sp ectrosc opy metho ds to sho w tha t positiv ely charg ed particles o f-radia tion (c alled
-particles ) are in fact doubly ioniz ed atoms o f helium . In 1909, R uther ford, Ernes t Marsden , and Hans Geig er
used-particles in their famous sc attering e xperiment tha t dispro ved Thomson ’s mo del (see Line ar
Momentum and C ollisions ).
In the Ruther ford g old f oil e xperiment (also kno wn as the Geig er–Marsden e xperiment), -particles w ere
incident on a thin g old f oil and w ere sc attere d by gold a toms inside the f oil (see Types o f Collisions ). The
outgoing p articles w ere detecte d by a scintilla tion screen surrounding the g old targ et (f or a detaile d
description o f the e xperimental setup , see Line ar Momentum and C ollisions ). When a sc attere d particle s truck
the screen , a tin y flash o f light (scintilla tion) w as obser ved at tha t location . By counting the scintilla tions seen
at various angles with resp ect to the direction o f the incident b eam, the scientis ts could determine wha t
fraction o f the incident p articles w ere sc attere d and wha t fraction w ere not deflecte d at all . If the plum pudding
model w ere c orrect , there w ould b e no b ack-scattere d-particles . Ho wever, the results o f the R uther ford
experiment sho wed tha t, although a siza ble fraction o f-particles emerg ed from the f oil not sc attere d at all as
though the f oil w ere not in their w ay, a signific ant fraction o f-particles w ere b ack-scattere d to ward the
sourc e. This kind o f result w as p ossible only when mos t of the mas s and the entire p ositiv e charg e of the g old
atom w ere c oncentra ted in a tin y sp ace inside the a tom .
In 1911, R uther ford prop osed anucle ar mo del of the atom . In R uther ford’s mo del, an a tom c ontaine d a
positiv ely charg ed nucleus o f negligible siz e, almos t lik e a p oint , but include d almos t the entire mas s of the
atom . The a tom also c ontaine d neg ative electrons tha t were lo cated within the a tom but rela tively far a way
from the nucleus . Ten y ears la ter, Ruther ford c oine d the name proton for the nucleus o f hydrog en and the
name neutron for a h ypothetic al electric ally neutral p article tha t would me diate the binding o f positiv e
protons in the nucleus (the neutron w as disc overed in 1932 b y James Chadwick ). Ruther ford is cre dite d with
the disc overy of the a tomic nucleus; ho wever, the R uther ford mo del o f atomic s tructure do es not e xplain the
Rydberg f ormula f or the h ydrog en emis sion lines .262 6 • Pho tons and Mat ter W aves
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Bohr ’s mo del of the h ydrog en atom , prop osed by Niels Bohr in 1913, w as the firs t quantum mo del tha t
correctly e xplaine d the h ydrog en emis sion sp ectr um. Bohr ’s mo del c ombines the clas sical mechanics o f
planetar y motion with the quantum c oncept o f photons . Onc e Ruther ford had es tablishe d the e xistenc e of the
atomic nucleus , Bohr ’s intuition tha t the neg ative electron in the h ydrog en a tom mus t rev olve around the
positiv e nucleus b ecame a logic al conse quenc e of the in verse -square -dis tanc e law of electros tatic a ttraction .
Recall tha t Coulomb ’s law describing the a ttraction b etween tw o opp osite charg es has a similar f orm to
Newton ’s univ ersal la w of gra vitation in the sense tha t the gra vitational f orce and the electros tatic f orce are
both decre asing as where ris the sep aration dis tanc e between the b odies . In the same w ay as Ear th
revolves around the sun , the neg ative electron in the h ydrog en a tom c an rev olve around the p ositiv e nucleus .
However, an ac celera ting charg e radia tes its energ y. Clas sically, if the electron mo ved around the nucleus in a
planetar y fashion , it w ould b e underg oing c entrip etal ac celera tion , and thus w ould b e radia ting energ y tha t
would c ause it to spiral do wn into the nucleus . Such a planetar y hydrog en a tom w ould not b e stable, which is
contrar y to wha t we kno w about ordinar y hydrog en a toms tha t do not disintegra te. Moreo ver, the clas sical
motion o f the electron is not a ble to e xplain the discrete emis sion sp ectr um o f hydrog en.
To circum vent these tw o difficulties , Bohr prop osed the f ollowing three postulates of Bohr ’s mo del:
1. The neg ative electron mo ves around the p ositiv e nucleus (proton) in a circular orbit . All electron orbits are
centere d at the nucleus . Not all clas sically p ossible orbits are a vailable to an electron b ound to the nucleus .
2. The allo wed electron orbits sa tisfy the first quantiza tion c ondition : In the nth orbit , the angular
momentum of the electron c an tak e only discrete v alues:
This p ostula te sa ys tha t the electron ’s angular momentum is quantiz ed. Denote d by and
resp ectiv ely, the radius o f the nth orbit and the electron ’s sp eed in it , the firs t quantiza tion c ondition c an
be expres sed explicitly as
3. An electron is allo wed to mak e transitions from one orbit where its energ y is to another orbit where its
energ y is When an a tom a bsorbs a photon , the electron mak es a transition to a higher -energ y orbit .
When an a tom emits a photon , the electron transits to a lo wer-energ y orbit . Electron transitions with the
simultaneous photon a bsorption or photon emis sion tak e plac einstantaneously . The allo wed electron
transitions sa tisfy the second quantiza tion c ondition :
where is the energ y of either an emit ted or an a bsorb ed photon with fre quency f. The sec ond
quantiza tion c ondition s tates tha t an electron ’s chang e in energ y in the h ydrog en a tom is quantiz ed.
These three p ostula tes o f the e arly quantum theor y of the h ydrog en a tom allo w us to deriv e not only the
Rydberg f ormula, but also the v alue o f the R ydberg c onstant and other imp ortant prop erties o f the h ydrog en
atom such as its energ y lev els, its ioniza tion energ y, and the siz es o f electron orbits . Note tha t in Bohr ’s mo del,
along with tw o nonclas sical quantiza tion p ostula tes, we also ha ve the clas sical description o f the electron as a
particle tha t is subjecte d to the C oulomb f orce, and its motion mus t ob ey Newton ’s laws of motion . The
hydrog en a tom , as an isola ted system , mus t ob ey the la ws of conser vation o f energ y and momentum in the w ay
we kno w from clas sical ph ysics . Ha ving this theoretic al framew ork in mind , we are re ady to pro ceed with our
analy sis.
Electron Orbits
To obtain the siz e of the electron ’snth orbit and the electron ’s sp eed in it , we turn to N ewtonian
mechanics . As a charg ed particle , the electron e xperienc es an electros tatic pull to ward the p ositiv ely charg ed
nucleus in the c enter o f its circular orbit . This electros tatic pull is the c entrip etal f orce tha t causes the electronℏ 6.33
ℏ 6.34
6.356.4 • Bohr ’s Model o f the Hy drogen A tom 263

to mo ve in a circle around the nucleus . Theref ore, the ma gnitude o f centrip etal f orce is identifie d with the
magnitude o f the electros tatic f orce:
Here ,denotes the v alue o f the elementar y charg e. The neg ative electron and p ositiv e proton ha ve the same
value o f charg e, When Equa tion 6.36 is combine d with the firs t quantiza tion c ondition giv en b y
Equa tion 6.34 , we can solv e for the sp eed, and f or the radius ,
Note tha t these results tell us tha t the electron ’s sp eed as w ell as the radius o f its orbit dep end only on the
inde xnthat enumera tes the orbit b ecause all other quantities in the prec eding e qua tions are fundamental
constants . We see from Equa tion 6.38 that the siz e of the orbit gro ws as the square o fn. This me ans tha t the
second orbit is f our times as larg e as the firs t orbit , and the third orbit is nine times as larg e as the firs t orbit ,
and so on . We also see from Equa tion 6.37 that the electron ’s sp eed in the orbit decre ases as the orbit siz e
incre ases . The electron ’s sp eed is larg est in the firs t Bohr orbit , for which is the orbit closes t to the
nucleus . The radius o f the firs t Bohr orbit is c alled the Bohr radius of h ydrog en, denote d as Its v alue is
obtaine d by set ting inEqua tion 6.38 :
We can subs titute inEqua tion 6.38 to expres s the radius o f the nth orbit in terms o f
This result me ans tha t the electron orbits in h ydrog en a tom are quantiz edbecause the orbital radius tak es on
only sp ecific v alues o f given b yEqua tion 6.40 , and no other v alues are allo wed.
Electron Ener gies
The total energ y of an electron in the nth orbit is the sum o f its kinetic energ y and its electros tatic
potential energ y Utilizing Equa tion 6.37 , we find tha t
Recall tha t the electros tatic p otential energ y of interaction b etween tw o charg es and that are sep arated
by a dis tanc e is Here , is the charg e of the nucleus in the h ydrog en a tom (the
charg e of the proton), is the charg e of the electron and is the radius o f the nth orbit . Now w e
use Equa tion 6.38 to find the p otential energ y of the electron:
The total energ y of the electron is the sum o fEqua tion 6.41 and Equa tion 6.42 :6.36
ℏ6.37
ℏ
6.38
ℏ
6.39
6.40
ℏ6.41
ℏ6.42
ℏ6.43264 6 • Pho tons and Mat ter W aves
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Note tha t the energ y dep ends only on the inde xnbecause the remaining s ymb ols in Equa tion 6.43 are
physical constants . The v alue o f the c onstant factor in Equa tion 6.43 is
It is c onvenient to e xpres s the electron ’s energ y in the nth orbit in terms o f this energ y, as
Now w e can see tha t the electron energies in the h ydrog en a tom are quantiz edbecause the y can ha ve only
discrete v alues o f given b yEqua tion 6.45 , and no other energ y values are
allowed. This set o f allo wed electron energies is c alled the ener gy sp ectr um of h ydrog en(Figure 6.17 ). The
inde xnthat enumera tes energ y lev els in Bohr ’s mo del is c alled the energ yquantum numb er. We identif y the
energ y of the electron inside the h ydrog en a tom with the energ y of the h ydrog en a tom . Note tha t the smalles t
value o f energ y is obtaine d for so the h ydrog en a tom c annot ha ve energ y smaller than tha t. This
smalles t value o f the electron energ y in the h ydrog en a tom is c alled the ground s tate ener gy of the h ydrog en
atom and its v alue is
The h ydrog en a tom ma y ha ve other energies tha t are higher than the ground s tate. These higher energ y states
are kno wn as excite d ener gy states of a h ydrog en atom .
There is only one ground s tate, but there are infinitely man y excited states b ecause there are infinitely man y
values o fninEqua tion 6.45 . We sa y tha t the electron is in the “firs t exite d state” when its energ y is (when
), the sec ond e xcited state when its energ y is (when ) and , in g eneral , in the nth exite d state
when its energ y is There is no highes t-of-all e xcited state; ho wever, there is a limit to the se quenc e of
excited states. If w e keep incre asing ninEqua tion 6.45 , we find tha t the limit is
∞In this limit ,
the electron is no long er b ound to the nucleus but b ecomes a free electron . An electron remains b ound in the
hydrog en a tom as long as its energ y is neg ative. An electron tha t orbits the nucleus in the firs t Bohr orbit ,
closes t to the nucleus , is in the ground s tate, where its energ y has the smalles t value . In the ground s tate, the
electron is mos t strongly b ound to the nucleus and its energ y is giv en b yEqua tion 6.46 . If w e want to remo ve
this electron from the a tom , we mus t supply it with enough energ y,
∞to at least balanc e out its ground s tate
energ y
The energ y tha t is nee ded to remo ve the electron from the a tom is c alled the ionizat ion ener gy. The ioniza tion
energ y
∞that is nee ded to remo ve the electron from the firs t Bohr orbit is c alled the ionizat ion limit of the
hydrog en atom . The ioniza tion limit in Equa tion 6.47 that we obtain in Bohr ’s mo del a grees with e xperimental
value .ℏ6.44
6.45
6.46
∞ ∞ 6.476.4 • Bohr ’s Model o f the Hy drogen A tom 265

Figur e6.17 The ener gy spectrum o f the h ydrogen at om. Ener gy levels (horiz ontal lines) r epresent the bound s tates o f an electr on in the
atom. Ther e is onl y one gr ound s tate, and infinit e quantiz ed e xcited s tates. The s tates ar e enumer ated b y the quantum number
Vertical lines il lustrate the al lowed electr on tr ansitions betw een the s tates. Downward arr ows illustrate transitions with
an emis sion o f a phot on with a w avelength in the indicat ed spectr al band.
Spec tral Emission Lines o f Hydrogen
To obtain the w avelengths o f the emit ted radia tion when an electron mak es a transition from the nth orbit to
the mth orbit , we use the sec ond o f Bohr ’s quantiza tion c onditions and Equa tion 6.45 for energies . The
emis sion o f energ y from the a tom c an o ccur only when an electron mak es a transition from an e xcited state to
a lower-energ y state. In the c ourse o f such a transition , the emit ted photon c arries a way the diff erenc e of
energies b etween the s tates in volved in the transition . The transition c annot g o in the other direction b ecause
the energ y of a photon c annot b e neg ative, which me ans tha t for emis sion w e mus t ha ve and
Theref ore, the third o f Bohr ’s postula tes giv es
Now w e expres s the photon ’s energ y in terms o f its w avelength , and divide b oth sides o fEqua tion
6.48 by The result is6.48
6.49266 6 • Pho tons and Mat ter W aves
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

The v alue o f the c onstant in this e qua tion is
This v alue is e xactly the R ydberg c onstant in the R ydberg heuris tic f ormula Equa tion 6.32 . In fact ,
Equa tion 6.49 is identic al to the R ydberg f ormula, b ecause f or a giv enm, we ha ve In this
way, the Bohr quantum mo del o f the h ydrog en a tom allo ws us to deriv e the e xperimental R ydberg c onstant
from firs t principles and to e xpres s it in terms o f fundamental c onstants . Transitions b etween the allo wed
electron orbits are illus trated in Figure 6.17 .
We can rep eat the same s teps tha t led to Equa tion 6.49 to obtain the w avelength o f the a bsorb ed radia tion; this
again giv esEqua tion 6.49 but this time f or the p ositions o f absorption lines in the a bsorption sp ectr um o f
hydrog en. The only diff erenc e is tha t for a bsorption , the quantum numb ermis the inde x of the orbit o ccupie d
by the electron b efore the transition ( lower-energ y orbit) and the quantum numb ernis the inde x of the orbit to
which the electron mak es the transition ( higher -energ y orbit). The diff erenc e between the electron energies in
these tw o orbits is the energ y of the a bsorb ed photon .
EXAMPLE 6.10
Size and I oniza tion Ener gy of the Hy drogen A tom in an Ex cited S tate
If a h ydrog en a tom in the ground s tate absorbs a 93.7-nm photon , corresp onding to a transition line in the
Lyman series , how do es this a ffect the a tom ’s energ y and siz e? Ho w much energ y is nee ded to ioniz e the a tom
when it is in this e xcited state? Giv e your ans wers in a bsolute units , and rela tive to the ground s tate.
Strategy
Before the a bsorption , the a tom is in its ground s tate. This me ans tha t the electron transition tak es plac e from
the orbit to some higher nth orbit . First, we mus t determine for the a bsorb ed wavelength
Then , we can use Equa tion 6.45 to find the energ y of the e xcited state and its ioniza tion energ y
∞and
use Equa tion 6.40 to find the radius of the a tom in the e xcited state. To es tima ten, we use Equa tion 6.49 .
Solution
Subs titute and inEqua tion 6.49 and solv e for You should not e xpect to obtain a p erfect
integ er ans wer b ecause o f rounding errors , but y our ans wer will b e close to an integ er, and y ou c an es tima ten
by taking the integral p art of your ans wer:
The radius o f the orbit is
Thus , after a bsorbing the 93.7-nm photon , the siz e of the h ydrog en a tom in the e xcited state is 36 times
larg er than b efore the a bsorption , when the a tom w as in the ground s tate. The energ y of the fifth e xcited state
( ) is:
After a bsorbing the 93.7-nm photon , the energ y of the h ydrog en a tom is larg er than it w as b efore the
absorption . Ioniza tion o f the a tom when it is in the fifth e xcited state ( ) requites 36 times les s energ y than
is nee ded when the a tom is in the ground s tate:
∞6.506.4 • Bohr ’s Model o f the Hy drogen A tom 267

Significanc e
We can analyz e an y sp ectral line in the sp ectr um o f hydrog en in the same w ay. Thus , the e xperimental
measurements o f spectral lines pro vide us with inf orma tion a bout the a tomic s tructure o f the h ydrog en a tom .
CHE CK Y OUR UNDER STANDING 6.10
When an electron in a h ydrog en a tom is in the firs t excited state, wha t pre diction do es the Bohr mo del giv e
about its orbital sp eed and kinetic energ y? Wha t is the ma gnitude o f its orbital angular momentum?
Bohr ’s mo del o f the h ydrog en a tom also c orrectly pre dicts the sp ectra o f some h ydrog en-lik e ions .Hydrog en-
like ions are a toms o f elements with an a tomic numb erZlarg er than one ( for h ydrog en) but with all
electrons remo ved except one . For e xample , an electric ally neutral helium a tom has an a tomic numb er
This me ans it has tw o electrons orbiting the nucleus with a charg e of When one o f the orbiting
electrons is remo ved from the helium a tom ( we sa y, when the helium a tom is singly ioniz ed), wha t remains is a
hydrog en-lik e atomic s tructure where the remaining electron orbits the nucleus with a charg e of
This typ e of situa tion is describ ed by the Bohr mo del. Assuming tha t the charg e of the nucleus is not but
we can rep eat all s teps , beginning with Equa tion 6.36 , to obtain the results f or a h ydrog en-lik e ion:
where is the Bohr orbit o f hydrog en, and
where is the ioniza tion limit o f a h ydrog en a tom . These e qua tions are g ood appro xima tions as long as the
atomic numb erZis not to o larg e.
The Bohr mo del is imp ortant b ecause it w as the firs t mo del to p ostula te the quantiza tion o f electron orbits in
atoms . Thus , it represents an e arly quantum theor y tha t gave a s tart to dev eloping mo dern quantum theor y. It
intro duced the c oncept o f a quantum numb er to describ e atomic s tates. The limita tion o f the e arly quantum
theor y is tha t it c annot describ e atoms in which the numb er o f electrons orbiting the nucleus is larg er than
one. The Bohr mo del o f hydrog en is a semi-clas sical mo del b ecause it c ombines the clas sical concept o f
electron orbits with the new c oncept o f quantiza tion . The remarka ble suc cess of this mo del prompte d man y
physicis ts to seek an e xplana tion f or wh y such a mo del should w ork a t all , and to seek an unders tanding o f the
physics b ehind the p ostula tes o f early quantum theor y. This se arch brought a bout the onset o f an entirely new
concept o f “ma tter w aves.”
6.5De Br oglie ’s Mat ter W aves
Learning Objectiv es
By the end o f this section, y ou wil l be able t o:
•Describe de Br oglie ’s hypo thesis o f mat ter w aves
•Explain ho w the de Br oglie ’s hypo thesis giv es the r ationale f or the quantiz ation o f angular momentum in
Bohr ’s quantum theor y of the hy drogen atom
•Describe the Davisson–Germer e xperiment
•Interpr et de Br oglie ’s idea o f mat ter w aves and ho w the y account f or elec tron dif fraction phenomena
Compton ’s formula es tablishe d tha t an electroma gnetic w ave can b ehave lik e a p article o f light when
interacting with ma tter. In 1924, Louis de Broglie prop osed a new sp ecula tive hypothesis tha t electrons and
other p articles o f ma tter c an b ehave lik e waves. Today, this ide a is kno wn as de Broglie ’s hypothesis of matter
waves. In 1926, De Broglie ’s hypothesis , tog ether with Bohr ’s early quantum theor y, led to the dev elopment o f
a new theor y ofwave quantum mechanics to describ e the ph ysics o f atoms and sub atomic p articles . Quantum6.51
6.52268 6 • Pho tons and Mat ter W aves
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

mechanics has p aved the w ay for new engineering in ventions and technologies , such as the laser and ma gnetic
resonanc e ima ging (MRI). These new technologies driv e disc overies in other scienc es such as biolog y and
chemis try.
According to de Broglie ’s hypothesis , mas sles s photons as w ell as mas sive particles mus t satisfy one c ommon
set o f rela tions tha t connect the energ yEwith the fre quency f, and the line ar momentum pwith the
wavelength We ha ve discus sed these rela tions f or photons in the c onte xt of Compton ’s eff ect. We are
recalling them no w in a more g eneral c onte xt. An y particle tha t has energ y and momentum is a de Broglie
waveof fre quency fand w avelength
Here ,Eand pare, resp ectiv ely, the rela tivis tic energ y and the momentum o f a p article . De Broglie ’s rela tions
are usually e xpres sed in terms o f the w ave vector and the w ave fre quency as w e usually
do for w aves:
Wave theor y tells us tha t a w ave carries its energ y with the group v elocity. For ma tter w aves, this group
velocity is the v elocity uof the p article . Identif ying the energ yEand momentum pof a p article with its
rela tivis tic energ y and its rela tivis tic momentum mu, resp ectiv ely, it follows from de Broglie rela tions tha t
matter w aves sa tisfy the f ollowing rela tion:
where When a p article is mas sles s we ha ve and Equa tion 6.57 becomes
EXAMPLE 6.11
How Long Ar e de Br oglie Ma tter W aves?
Calcula te the de Broglie w avelength o f: (a) a 0.65-k g basketball thro wn a t a sp eed of 10 m/s , (b) a nonrela tivis tic
electron with a kinetic energ y of 1.0 e V, and (c) a rela tivis tic electron with a kinetic energ y of
Strategy
We use Equa tion 6.57 to find the de Broglie w avelength . When the problem in volves a nonrela tivis tic object
moving with a nonrela tivis tic sp eedu, such as in (a) when we use nonrela tivis tic momentum p.
When the nonrela tivis tic appro xima tion c annot b e use d, such as in (c), w e mus t use the rela tivis tic momentum
where the res t mas s energ y of a p article is and is the Lorentz factor
The total energ yEof a p article is giv en b yEqua tion 6.53 and the kinetic energ y is
When the kinetic energ y is kno wn, we can in vertEqua tion 6.18 to find the
momentum and subs titute in Equa tion 6.57 to obtain
Dep ending on the problem a t hand , in this e qua tion w e can use the f ollowing v alues f orhc:6.53
6.54
ℏ 6.55
ℏ 6.56
ℏ
ℏ6.57
6.586.5 • De Br oglie ’s Mat ter W aves 269

Solution
a.For the b asketball, the kinetic energ y is
and the res t mas s energ y is
We see tha t and use
b.For the nonrela tivis tic electron ,
and when we ha ve so w e can use the nonrela tivis tic
formula. Ho wever, it is simpler here to use Equa tion 6.58 :
If we use nonrela tivis tic momentum , we obtain the same result b ecause 1 e V is much smaller than the res t
mas s of the electron .
c.For a fas t electron with rela tivis tic eff ects c annot b e neglecte d because its total energ y is
and is not negligible:
Significanc e
We see from these es tima tes tha t De Broglie ’s wavelengths o f macrosc opic objects such as a b all are
imme asura bly small . Theref ore, even if the y exist, the y are not detecta ble and do not a ffect the motion o f
macrosc opic objects .
CHE CK Y OUR UNDER STANDING 6.11
Wha t is de Broglie ’s wavelength o f a nonrela tivis tic proton with a kinetic energ y of 1.0 e V?
Using the c oncept o f the electron ma tter w ave, de Broglie pro vide d a ra tionale f or the quantiza tion o f the
electron ’s angular momentum in the h ydrog en a tom , which w as p ostula ted in Bohr ’s quantum theor y. The
physical explana tion f or the firs t Bohr quantiza tion c ondition c omes na turally when w e as sume tha t an
electron in a h ydrog en a tom b ehaves not lik e a p article but lik e a w ave. To see it cle arly , ima gine a s tretche d
guitar s tring tha t is clamp ed at both ends and vibra tes in one o f its normal mo des. If the length o f the s tring is l
(Figure 6.18 ), the w avelengths o f these vibra tions c annot b e arbitrar y but mus t be such tha t an integ erk
numb er o f half -wavelengths fit e xactly on the dis tanc elbetween the ends . This is the c ondition
for a s tanding w ave on a s tring . Now supp ose tha t ins tead o f having the s tring clamp ed at the w alls, we bend its
length into a circle and fas ten its ends to e ach other . This pro duces a circular s tring tha t vibra tes in normal
modes, satisfying the same s tanding-w ave condition , but the numb er o f half -wavelengths mus t no w be an ev en
numb er and the length lis no w connecte d to the radius of the circle . This me ans tha t the radii are
not arbitrar y but mus t satisfy the f ollowing s tanding-w ave condition:
If an electron in the nth Bohr orbit mo ves as a w ave, byEqua tion 6.59 its w avelength mus t be equal to
Assuming tha tEqua tion 6.58 is valid , the electron w ave of this w avelength c orresp onds to the6.59270 6 • Pho tons and Mat ter W aves
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

electron ’s line ar momentum , ℏ In a circular orbit , theref ore, the electron ’s
angular momentum mus t be
This e qua tion is the firs t of Bohr ’s quantiza tion c onditions , giv en b yEqua tion 6.36 . Providing a ph ysical
explana tion f or Bohr ’s quantiza tion c ondition is a c onvincing theoretic al argument f or the e xistenc e of ma tter
waves.
Figur e6.18 Standing-w ave pat tern: (a) a s tretched s tring clamped at the w alls; (b) an electr on w ave trapped in the thir d Bohr orbit in the
hydrogen at om.
EXAMPLE 6.12
The Electr on W ave in the Gr ound S tate of Hy drogen
Find the de Broglie w avelength o f an electron in the ground s tate of hydrog en.
Strategy
We combine the firs t quantiza tion c ondition in Equa tion 6.60 with Equa tion 6.36 and use Equa tion 6.38 for the
first Bohr radius with
Solution
When and the Bohr quantiza tion c ondition giv es ℏ ℏ The
electron w avelength is:
ℏ
Significanc e
We obtain the same result when w e use Equa tion 6.58 directly .
CHE CK Y OUR UNDER STANDING 6.12
Find the de Broglie w avelength o f an electron in the third e xcited state of hydrog en.
Exp erimental c onfirma tion o f ma tter w aves c ame in 1927 when C .Davisson and L. Germer performe d a series
of electron-sc attering e xperiments tha t cle arly sho wed tha t electrons do b ehave lik e waves. Davisson and
Germer did not set up their e xperiment to c onfirm de Broglie ’s hypothesis: The c onfirma tion c ame as a
bypro duct o f their routine e xperimental s tudies o f metal sur faces under electron b omb ardment .
In the p articular e xperiment tha t pro vide d the v ery firs t evidenc e of electron w aves (kno wn to day as the
Davisson– Germer e xperiment ), the y studie d a sur face of nick el. Their nick el sample w as sp ecially prep aredℏ
ℏ6.606.5 • De Br oglie ’s Mat ter W aves 271

in a high-temp erature o ven to chang e its usual p olycrystalline s tructure to a f orm in which larg e single -crystal
domains o ccup y the v olume .Figure 6.19 shows the e xperimental setup . Thermal electrons are rele ased from a
heated element (usually made o f tungs ten) in the electron gun and ac celera ted through a p otential diff erenc e
becoming a w ell-c ollima ted beam o f electrons pro duced by an electron gun . The kinetic energ yKof the
electrons is adjus ted by selecting a v alue o f the p otential diff erenc e in the electron gun . This pro duces a b eam
of electrons with a set v alue o f line ar momentum , in ac cordanc e with the c onser vation o f energ y:
The electron b eam is incident on the nick el sample in the direction normal to its sur face. At the sur face, it
scatters in v arious directions . The intensity o f the b eam sc attere d in a selecte d direction is me asure d by a
highly sensitiv e detector . The detector ’s angular p osition with resp ect to the direction o f the incident b eam c an
be varie d from to The entire setup is enclose d in a v acuum chamb er to prev ent electron
collisions with air molecules , as such thermal c ollisions w ould chang e the electrons’ kinetic energ y and are not
desira ble.
Figur e6.19 Schematics o f the e xperimental setup o f the Da visson– Germer diffr action e xperiment. A w ell-collimat ed beam o f electr ons is
scat tered o ff the nick el tar get. The kinetic ener gy of electr ons in the incident beam is select ed b y adjus ting a v ariable pot ential , in the
electr on g un. Int ensity o f the scat tered electr on beam is measur ed for a r ange of scat tering angles wher eas the dis tanc e betw een the
detector and the tar get does not chang e.
When the nick el targ et has a p olycrystalline f orm with man y randomly oriente d microsc opic cr ystals, the
incident electrons sc atter o ff its sur face in v arious random directions . As a result , the intensity o f the sc attere d
electron b eam is much the same in an y direction , resembling a diffuse reflection o f light from a p orous
surface. Ho wever, when the nick el targ et has a regular cr ystalline s tructure , the intensity o f the sc attere d
electron b eam sho ws a cle ar maximum a t a sp ecific angle and the results sho w a cle ar diffraction p attern (see
Figure 6.20 ). Similar diffraction p atterns f orme d by X-rays scattere d by various cr ystalline solids w ere s tudie d
in 1912 b y father -and-son ph ysicis ts W illiam H. Braggand W illiam L. Bragg. The Bra gg la w in X -ray
crystallograph y pro vides a c onnection b etween the w avelength of the radia tion incident on a cr ystalline
lattice, the la ttice sp acing , and the p osition o f the inter ferenc e maximum in the diffracte d radia tion (see
Diffraction ).
The la ttice sp acing o f the Da visson– Germer targ et, determine d with X -ray cr ystallograph y, was me asure d to b e
Unlik e X-ray cr ystallograph y in which X -rays penetra te the sample , in the original
Davisson– Germer e xperiment , only the sur face atoms interact with the incident electron b eam. For the
surface diffraction , the maximum intensity o f the reflecte d electron b eam is obser ved for sc attering angles
that satisfy the c ondition (see Figure 6.21 ). The firs t-order maximum (f or ) is me asure d at a
scattering angle o f at which giv es the w avelength o f the incident radia tion as
On the other hand , a 54- V potential ac celera tes the incident electrons to kinetic
energies o f Their momentum , calcula ted from Equa tion 6.61 , is When
we subs titute this result in Equa tion 6.58 , the de Broglie w avelength is obtaine d as6.61272 6 • Pho tons and Mat ter W aves
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

The same result is obtaine d when w e use inEqua tion 6.61 . The pro ximity o f this theoretic al result
to the Da visson– Germer e xperimental v alue o f is a c onvincing argument f or the e xistenc e of de
Broglie ma tter w aves.
Figur e6.20 The e xperimental r esul ts of electr on diffr action on a nick el tar get for the ac celerating pot ential in the electr on g un o f about
The int ensity maximum is r egis tered at the scat tering angle o f about
Figur e6.21 In the sur face diffr action o f a monochr omatic electr omagnetic w ave on a cr ystalline lat tice structur e, the in-phase incident
beams ar e reflect ed fr om at oms on the sur face. A ray reflect ed fr om the left at om tr avels an additional dis tanc e to the det ector,
wher eais the lat tice spacing . The r eflect ed beams r emain in-phase when Dis an int eger mul tiple o f their w avelength The int ensity o f the
reflect ed w aves has pr onounc ed maxima f or angles satis fying
Diffraction lines me asure d with lo w-energ y electrons , such as those use d in the Da visson– Germer e xperiment ,
are quite bro ad (see Figure 6.20 ) because the incident electrons are sc attere d only from the sur face. The
resolution o f diffraction ima ges gre atly impro ves when a higher -energ y electron b eam p asses through a thin
metal f oil. This o ccurs b ecause the diffraction ima ge is cre ated by sc attering o ff man y cr ystalline planes inside
the v olume , and the maxima pro duced in sc attering a t Bra gg angles are sharp (see Figure 6.22 ).6.626.5 • De Br oglie ’s Mat ter W aves 273

Figur e6.22 Diffr action pat terns ob tained in scat tering on a cr ystalline solid: (a) with X -rays, and (b) with electr ons. The obser ved pat tern
reflects the s ymmetr y of the cr ystalline s tructur e of the sample .
Sinc e the w ork o f Da visson and Germer , de Broglie ’s hypothesis has b een e xtensiv ely tes ted with v arious
experimental techniques , and the e xistenc e of de Broglie w aves has b een c onfirme d for numerous elementar y
particles . Neutrons ha ve been use d in sc attering e xperiments to determine cr ystalline s tructures o f solids
from inter ferenc e patterns f orme d by neutron ma tter w aves. The neutron has z ero charg e and its mas s is
comp arable with the mas s of a p ositiv ely charg ed proton . Both neutrons and protons c an b e seen as ma tter
waves. Theref ore, the prop erty of being a ma tter w ave is not sp ecific to electric ally charg ed particles but is tr ue
of all p articles in motion . Ma tter w aves o f molecules as larg e as c arbon have been me asure d. All ph ysical
objects , small or larg e, have an as sociated ma tter w ave as long as the y remain in motion . The univ ersal
character o f de Broglie ma tter w aves is firmly es tablishe d.
EXAMPLE 6.13
Neutr on Sca ttering
Supp ose tha t a neutron b eam is use d in a diffraction e xperiment on a typic al cr ystalline solid . Estima te the
kinetic energ y of a neutron (in e V) in the neutron b eam and c omp are it with kinetic energ y of an ide al gas in
equilibrium a t room temp erature .
Strategy
We as sume tha t a typic al cr ystal sp acing ais of the order o f 1.0 Å . To obser ve a diffraction p attern on such a
lattice, the neutron w avelength mus t be on the same order o f ma gnitude as the la ttice sp acing . We use
Equa tion 6.61 to find the momentum pand kinetic energ yK. To comp are this energ y with the energ y of
ideal gas in e quilibrium a t room temp erature we use the rela tion where
is the Boltzmann c onstant .
Solution
We ev alua tepcto comp are it with the neutron ’s res t mas s energ y
We see tha t so and w e can use the nonrela tivis tic kinetic energ y:274 6 • Pho tons and Mat ter W aves
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Kinetic energ y of ide al gas in e quilibrium a t 300 K is:
We see tha t these energies are o f the same order o f ma gnitude .
Significanc e
Neutrons with energies in this rang e, which is typic al for an ide al gas a t room temp erature , are c alled “thermal
neutrons .”
EXAMPLE 6.14
Wavelength o f a R elativis tic P roton
In a sup ercollider a t CERN , protons c an b e ac celera ted to v elocities o f 0.75 c. Wha t are their de Broglie
wavelengths a t this sp eed? Wha t are their kinetic energies?
Strategy
The res t mas s energ y of a proton is When
the proton ’s velocity is kno wn, we ha ve and We obtain the
wavelength and kinetic energ yKfrom rela tivis tic rela tions .
Solution
Significanc e
Notice tha t because a proton is 1835 times more mas sive than an electron , if this e xperiment w ere p erforme d
with electrons , a simple resc aling o f these results w ould giv e us the electron ’s wavelength o f
and its kinetic energ y of
CHE CK Y OUR UNDER STANDING 6.13
Find the de Broglie w avelength and kinetic energ y of a free electron tha t tra vels a t a sp eed of 0.75 c.
6.6Wave-Particle Dualit y
Learning Objectiv es
By the end o f this section, y ou wil l be able t o:
•Identif y phenomena in which elec tromagne tic w aves behav e like a beam o f pho tons and par ticles behav e
like waves
•Describe the phy sics principles behind elec tron micr oscop y
•Summariz e the e volution o f scientific thought that led to the de velopment o f quantum mechanics
The energ y of radia tion detecte d by a radio -signal rec eiving antenna c omes as the energ y of an
electroma gnetic w ave. The same energ y of radia tion detecte d by a photo current in the photo electric eff ect
comes as the energ y of individual photon p articles . Theref ore, the ques tion arises a bout the na ture o f
electroma gnetic radia tion: Is a photon a w ave or is it a p article? Similar ques tions ma y be ask ed about other6.6 • W ave-Particle Dualit y 275

kno wn f orms o f energ y. For e xample , an electron tha t forms p art of an electric current in a circuit b ehaves lik e
a particle mo ving in unison with other electrons inside the c onductor . The same electron b ehaves as a w ave
when it p asses through a solid cr ystalline s tructure and f orms a diffraction ima ge. Is an electron a w ave or is it
a particle? The same ques tion c an b e extende d to all p articles o f ma tter—elementar y particles , as w ell as
comp ound molecules —asking a bout their tr ue ph ysical na ture . At our present s tate of kno wledge, such
ques tions a bout the tr ue na ture o f things do not ha ve conclusiv e ans wers. All we can sa y is tha twave-particle
dualit yexists in na ture: Under some e xperimental c onditions , a p article app ears to act as a p article , and
under diff erent e xperimental c onditions , a p article app ears to act a w ave. Conversely , under some ph ysical
circums tanc es electroma gnetic radia tion acts as a w ave, and under other ph ysical circums tanc es, radia tion
acts as a b eam o f photons .
This dualis tic interpreta tion is not a new ph ysics c oncept brought a bout b y sp ecific disc overies in the
twentieth c entur y. It w as alre ady present in a deb ate between Isaac N ewton and Chris tiaan Huy gens a bout the
nature o f light , beginning in the y ear 1670. A ccording to N ewton , a b eam o f light is a c ollection o f corpuscles o f
light . According to Huy gens, light is a w ave. The c orpuscular h ypothesis faile d in 1803, when Thomas Y oung
announc ed his double -slit inter ferenc e experiment with light (see Figure 6.23 ), which firmly es tablishe d
light as a w ave. In J ames Clerk Maxw ell’s theor y of electroma gnetism (c omplete d by the y ear 1873), light is an
electroma gnetic w ave. Maxw ell’s clas sical view o f radia tion as an electroma gnetic w ave is s till v alid to day;
however, it is una ble to e xplain blackb ody radia tion and the photo electric eff ect, where light acts as a b eam o f
photons .
Figur e6.23 Young ’s double -slit e xperiment e xplains the int erference of light b y making an analog y with the int erference of water w aves.
Two waves ar e gener ated at the positions o f two slits in an opaque scr een. The w aves ha ve the same w avelengths . The y travel from their
origins at the slits t o the vie wing scr een plac ed to the right o f the slits . The w aves meet on the vie wing scr een. A t the positions mark ed
“Max ” on the scr een, the meeting w aves ar e in-phase and the c ombined w ave amplitude is enhanc ed. A t positions mark ed “Min, ” the
combined w ave amplitude is z ero. For light, this mechanism cr eates a bright -and-dark fring e pat tern on the vie wing scr een.
A similar dichotom y existed in the interpreta tion o f electricity . From Benjamin F ranklin ’s obser vations o f
electricity in 1751 until J .J. Thomson ’s disc overy of the electron in 1897, electric current w as seen as a flo w in
a continuous electric me dium . Within this theor y of electric fluid , the present theor y of electric circuits w as
develop ed, and electroma gnetism and electroma gnetic induction w ere disc overed. Thomson ’s experiment
showed tha t the unit o f neg ative electric charg e (an electron) c an tra vel in a v acuum without an y me dium to
carry the charg e around , as in electric circuits . This disc overy chang ed the w ay in which electricity is
unders tood to day and g ave the electron its p article s tatus. In Bohr ’s early quantum theor y of the h ydrog en
atom , both the electron and the proton are p articles o f ma tter. Lik ewise , in the C ompton sc attering o f X-rays on276 6 • Pho tons and Mat ter W aves
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

electrons , the electron is a p article . On the other hand , in electron-sc attering e xperiments on cr ystalline
structures , the electron b ehaves as a w ave.
A sk eptic ma y raise a ques tion tha t perhaps an electron might alw ays be nothing more than a p article , and tha t
the diffraction ima ges obtaine d in electron-sc attering e xperiments might b e explaine d within some
macrosc opic mo del o f a cr ystal and a macrosc opic mo del o f electrons c oming a t it lik e a rain o f ping-p ong
balls. As a ma tter o f fact , to in vestigate this ques tion , we do not nee d a c omple x mo del o f a cr ystal but jus t a
couple o f simple slits in a screen tha t is op aque to electrons . In other w ords , to g ather c onvincing evidenc e
about the na ture o f an electron , we nee d to rep eat the Y oung double -slit e xperiment with electrons . If the
electron is a w ave, we should obser ve the f orma tion o f inter ferenc e patterns typic al for w aves, such as those
describ ed in Figure 6.23 , even when electrons c ome through the slits one b y one . Ho wever, if the electron is a
not a w ave but a p article , the inter ferenc e fring es will not b e forme d.
The v ery firs t double -slit e xperiment with a b eam o f electrons , performe d by Cla us J önsson in German y in
1961, demons trated tha t a b eam o f electrons indee d forms an inter ferenc e pattern , which me ans tha t
electrons c ollectiv ely b ehave as a w ave. The firs t double -slit e xperiments with single electrons p assing through
the slits one -by-one w ere p erforme d by Giulio Pozziin 1974 in Italy and b y Akira Tonomura in 1989 in J apan.
The y sho w tha t inter ferenc e fring es are f orme d gradually , even when electrons p ass through the slits
individually . This demons trates c onclusiv ely tha t electron-diffraction ima ges are f orme d because o f the w ave
nature o f electrons . The results seen in double -slit e xperiments with electrons are illus trated by the ima ges o f
the inter ferenc e pattern in Figure 6.24 .
Figur e6.24 Comput er-simulat ed int erference fring es seen in the Y oung double -slit e xperiment with electr ons. One pat tern is gr adual ly
formed on the scr een, r egardles s of whether the electr ons c ome thr ough the slits as a beam or individual ly one -by-one .
EXAMPLE 6.15
Double -Slit Experiment with Electr ons
In one e xperimental setup f or studying inter ferenc e patterns o f electron w aves, two slits are cre ated in a g old-
coated silic on membrane . Each slit is 62-nm wide and long , and the sep aration b etween the slits is 272
nm. The electron b eam is cre ated in an electron gun b y he ating a tungs ten element and b y ac celera ting the
electrons acros s a 600- V potential . The b eam is subse quently c ollima ted using electroma gnetic lenses , and the
collima ted beam o f electrons is sent through the slits . Find the angular p osition o f the firs t-order bright fring e
on the viewing screen .
Strategy
Recall tha t the angular p osition of the nth order bright fring e tha t is f orme d in Y oung ’s tw o-slit inter ferenc e
pattern (discus sed in a previous chapter) is rela ted to the sep aration ,d, between the slits and to the
wavelength ,of the incident light b y the e qua tion where The sep aration is
given and is e qual to For the firs t-order fring e, we tak e The only thing w e no w nee d is the
wavelength o f the incident electron w ave.
Sinc e the electron has b een ac celera ted from res t acros s a p otential diff erenc e of its kinetic
energ y is The res t-mas s energ y of the electron is
We compute its de Broglie w avelength as tha t of a nonrela tivis tic electron b ecause its kinetic energ y is much
smaller than its res t energ y
Solution
The electron ’s wavelength is6.6 • W ave-Particle Dualit y 277

This is use d to obtain the p osition o f the firs t bright fring e:
Significanc e
Notice tha t this is also the angular resolution b etween tw o consecutiv e bright fring es up to a bout For
example , between the z ero-order fring e and the firs t-order fring e, between the firs t-order fring e and the
second-order fring e, and so on .
CHE CK Y OUR UNDER STANDING 6.14
For the situa tion describ ed in Example 6.15 , find the angular p osition o f the fifth-order bright fring e on the
viewing screen .
The w ave-particle dual na ture o f ma tter p articles and o f radia tion is a declara tion o f our ina bility to describ e
physical re ality within one unifie d clas sical theor y because sep arately neither a clas sical particle appro ach nor
a clas sical w ave appro ach c an fully e xplain the obser ved phenomena. This limita tion o f the clas sical appro ach
was re alized by the y ear 1928, and a f ounda tion f or a new s tatistical theor y, called quantum mechanics , was
put in plac e by Bohr , Edwin Schrö ding er, Werner Heisenb erg, and P aulDirac . Quantum mechanics tak es de
Broglie ’s ide a of ma tter w aves to b e the fundamental prop erty of all p articles and giv es it a s tatistical
interpreta tion . According to this interpreta tion , a w ave tha t is as sociated with a p article c arries inf orma tion
about the prob able p ositions o f the p article and a bout its other prop erties. A single p article is seen as a mo ving
wave packetsuch as the one sho wn in Figure 6.25 . We can intuitiv ely sense from this e xample tha t if a p article
is a w ave packet, we will not b e able to me asure its e xact p osition in the same sense as w e cannot pinp oint a
location o f a w ave packet in a vibra ting guitar s tring . The unc ertainty , in me asuring the p article ’s position
is connecte d to the unc ertainty , in the simultaneous me asuring o f its line ar momentum b y Heisenb erg’s
unc ertainty principle:
Heisenb erg’s principle e xpres ses the la w of na ture tha t, at the quantum lev el, our p erception is limite d. For
example , if w e kno w the e xact p osition o f a b ody (which me ans tha t inEqua tion 6.63 ) at the same time
we cannot kno w its momentum , because then the unc ertainty in its momentum b ecomes infinite ( because
ℏ inEqua tion 6.63 ). The Heisenb erg unc ertaint y principle sets the limit on the precision o f
simultaneous measurements o f position and momentum o f a p article; it sho ws tha t the b est precision w e can
obtain is when w e ha ve an e quals sign ( ) in Equa tion 6.63 , and w e cannot do b etter than tha t, even with the
best ins truments o f the future . Heisenb erg’s principle is a c onse quenc e of the w ave na ture o f particles .ℏ 6.63278 6 • Pho tons and Mat ter W aves
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Figur e6.25 In this gr aphic, a par ticle is sho wn as a w ave pack et and its position does not ha ve an e xact v alue .
We routinely use man y electronic devic es tha t exploit w ave-particle duality without ev en re alizing the
sophis tication o f the ph ysics underlying their op eration . One e xample o f a technolog y based on the p article
prop erties o f photons and electrons is a charg e-couple d devic e, which is use d for light detection in an y
instrumenta tion where high-quality digital da ta are re quire d, such as in digital c ameras or in me dical sensors .
An e xample in which the w ave prop erties o f electrons is e xploite d is an electron microsc ope.
In 1931, ph ysicis t Erns tRuska —building on the ide a tha t ma gnetic fields c an direct an electron b eam jus t as
lenses c an direct a b eam o f light in an optic al microsc ope—develop ed the firs t prototyp e of the electron
microsc ope. This dev elopment origina ted the field o felectron microsc opy. In the transmis sion electron
microsc ope (TEM) , sho wn in Figure 6.26 , electrons are pro duced by a hot tungs ten element and ac celera ted by
a potential diff erenc e in an electron gun , which giv es them up to 400 k eV in kinetic energ y. After le aving the
electron gun , the electron b eam is f ocuse d by electroma gnetic lenses (a s ystem o f condensing lenses) and
transmit ted through a sp ecimen sample to b e view ed. The ima ge of the sample is rec onstructe d from the
transmit ted electron b eam. The ma gnifie d ima ge ma y be view ed either directly on a fluoresc ent screen or
indirectly b y sending it , for e xample , to a digital c amera or a c omputer monitor . The entire setup c onsis ting o f
the electron gun , the lenses , the sp ecimen , and the fluoresc ent screen are enclose d in a v acuum chamb er to
prev ent the energ y los s from the b eam. Resolution o f the TEM is limite d only b y spheric al aberra tion
(discus sed in a previous chapter). Mo dern high-resolution mo dels o f a TEM c an ha ve resolving p ower gre ater
than 0.5 Å and ma gnific ations higher than 50 million times . For c omp arison , the b est resolving p ower
obtaine d with light microsc opy is currently a bout 97 nm . A limita tion o f the TEM is tha t the samples mus t be
about 100-nm thick and biologic al samples re quire a sp ecial prep aration in volving chemic al “fixing ” to
stabiliz e them f or ultra thin slicing .6.6 • W ave-Particle Dualit y 279

Figur e6.26 TEM: An electr on beam pr oduc ed b y an electr on g un is c ollimat ed b y condenser lenses and pas ses thr ough a specimen. The
transmit ted electr ons ar e project ed on a scr een and the imag e is sent t o a camer a. (credit: modification o f work b y Dr. Graham Bear ds)
Such limita tions do not app ear in the scanning electron microsc ope (SEM) , which w as in vente d by Manfre d
von Ardenne in 1937. In an SEM, a typic al energ y of the electron b eam is up to 40 k eV and the b eam is not
transmit ted through a sample but is sc attere d off its sur face. Sur face top ograph y of the sample is
reconstructe d by analyzing b ack-scattere d electrons , transmit ted electrons , and the emit ted radia tion
produced by electrons interacting with a toms in the sample . The resolving p ower o f an SEM is b etter than 1
nm, and the ma gnific ation c an b e more than 250 times b etter than tha t obtaine d with a light microsc ope. The
samples sc anne d by an SEM c an b e as larg e as sev eral c entimeters but the y mus t be sp ecially prep ared,
dep ending on electric al prop erties o f the sample .
High ma gnific ations o f the TEM and SEM allo w us to see individual molecules . High resolving p owers o f the
TEM and SEM allo w us to see fine details , such as those sho wn in the SEM micrograph o f pollen a t the
beginning o f this chapter ( Figure 6.1 ).
EXAMPLE 6.16
Resol ving P ower of an Electr on Micr oscope
If a 1.0-pm electron b eam o f a TEM p asses through a circular op ening , wha t is the angle b etween the
two jus t-resolv able p oint sourc es for this microsc ope?
Solution
We can directly use a f ormula f or the resolving p ower, of a microsc ope (discus sed in a previous chapter)
when the w avelength o f the incident radia tion is and the diameter o f the ap erture is
Significanc e
Note tha t if w e use d a c onventional microsc ope with a 400-nm light , the resolving p ower w ould b e only
which me ans tha t all o f the fine details in the ima ge would b e blurre d.
CHE CK Y OUR UNDER STANDING 6.15280 6 • Pho tons and Mat ter W aves
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Supp ose tha t the diameter o f the ap erture in Example 6.16 is halv ed. Ho w do es it a ffect the resolving p ower?6.6 • W ave-Particle Dualit y 281

CHAP TER RE VIEW
Key Terms
absorb er any object tha t absorbs radia tion
absorpt ion sp ectr um wavelengths o f absorb ed
radia tion b y atoms and molecules
Balmer f ormula describ es the emis sion sp ectr um
of a h ydrog en a tom in the visible -light rang e
Balmer series spectral lines c orresp onding to
electron transitions to/from the state of the
hydrog en a tom , describ ed by the Balmer f ormula
blackb ody perfect a bsorb er/emit ter
blackb ody radiat ion radia tion emit ted by a
blackb ody
Bohr radius of h ydrog en radius o f the firs t Bohr ’s
orbit
Bohr ’s mo del of the h ydrog en atom first quantum
model to e xplain emis sion sp ectra o f hydrog en
Brack ett series spectral lines c orresp onding to
electron transitions to/from the state
Compton eff ect the chang e in w avelength when an
X-ray is sc attere d by its interaction with some
materials
Compton shift differenc e between the w avelengths
of the incident X -ray and the sc attere d X-ray
Compton w avelength physical constant with the
value
cut-off fre quency frequency o f incident light
below which the photo electric eff ect do es not
occur
cut-off w avelength wavelength o f incident light
that corresp onds to cut -off fre quency
Davisson– Germer e xperiment historic ally firs t
electron-diffraction e xperiment tha t rev ealed
electron w aves
de Broglie w avematter w ave as sociated with an y
object tha t has mas s and momentum
de Broglie ’s hypothesis of matter w aves particles
of ma tter c an b ehave lik e waves
double -slit inter ferenc e experiment Young ’s
double -slit e xperiment , which sho ws the
inter ferenc e of waves
electron microsc opymicrosc opy tha t uses
electron w aves to “ see” fine details o f nano -size
objects
emis sion sp ectr um wavelengths o f emit ted
radia tion b y atoms and molecules
emitter any object tha t emits radia tion
ener gy of a photon quantum o f radiant energ y,
dep ends only on a photon ’s fre quency
ener gy sp ectr um of h ydrog en set o f allo wed
discrete energies o f an electron in a h ydrog en
atomexcite d ener gy states of the H atom energ y state
other than the ground s tate
Fraunhof er lines dark a bsorption lines in the
continuum solar emis sion sp ectr um
ground s tate ener gy of the h ydrog en atom energ y
of an electron in the firs t Bohr orbit o f the
hydrog en a tom
group v elocityvelocity o f a w ave, energ y tra vels
with the group v elocity
Heisenb erg unc ertaint y principle sets the limits
on precision in simultaneous me asurements o f
momentum and p osition o f a p article
Humphre ys series spectral lines c orresp onding to
electron transitions to/from the state
hydrog en-lik e atom ioniz ed atom with one
electron remaining and nucleus with charg e
inelas tic sc attering scattering eff ect where kinetic
energ y is not c onser ved but the total energ y is
conser ved
ionizat ion ener gyenerg y nee ded to remo ve an
electron from an a tom
ionizat ion limit of the h ydrog en atom ioniza tion
energ y nee ded to remo ve an electron from the
first Bohr orbit
Lyman series spectral lines c orresp onding to
electron transitions to/from the ground s tate
nucle ar mo del of the atom heavy positiv ely
charg ed nucleus a t the c enter is surrounde d by
electrons , prop osed by Ruther ford
Paschen series spectral lines c orresp onding to
electron transitions to/from the state
Pfund series spectral lines c orresp onding to
electron transitions to/from the state
photo current in a circuit , current tha t flo ws when
a photo electro de is illumina ted
photo electric eff ect emis sion o f electrons from a
metal sur face exposed to electroma gnetic
radia tion o f the prop er fre quency
photo electro de in a circuit , an electro de tha t emits
photo electrons
photo electron electron emit ted from a metal
surface in the presenc e of incident radia tion
photon particle o f light
Planck ’s hypothesis of ener gy quanta energ y
exchang es b etween the radia tion and the w alls
take plac e only in the f orm o f discrete energ y
quanta
postulates of Bohr ’s mo del three as sumptions
that set a frame f or Bohr ’s mo del
power intensit yenerg y tha t passes through a unit282 6 • Chap ter Re view
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

surface per unit time
prop agation v ector vector with ma gnitude
that has the direction o f the photon ’s line ar
momentum
quant ized ener gies discrete energies; not
continuous
quantum numb er inde x tha t enumera tes energ y
levels
quantum phenomenon in interaction with ma tter,
photon trans fers either all its energ y or nothing
quantum s tate of a Planck ’s oscillator any mo de
of vibra tion o f Planck ’s oscilla tor, enumera ted by
quantum numb er
reduc ed Planck ’s cons tant Planck ’s constant
divide d by
Ruther ford’s gold f oil e xperiment first
experiment to demons trate the e xistenc e of the
atomic nucleus
Rydberg cons tant f or h ydrog en physical constant
in the Balmer f ormulaRydberg formula experimentally f ound p ositions
of spectral lines o f hydrog en a tom
scattering angle angle b etween the direction o f the
scattere d beam and the direction o f the incident
beam
Stef an–Boltzmann c ons tant physical constant in
Stefan ’s law
stopping p otent ial in a circuit , potential diff erenc e
that stops photo current
wave numb er magnitude o f the prop agation v ector
wave quantum mechanics theor y tha t explains
the ph ysics o f atoms and sub atomic p articles
wave-particle dualit yparticles c an b ehave as
waves and radia tion c an b ehave as p articles
work funct ion energ y nee ded to detach
photo electron from the metal sur face
-particle doubly ioniz ed helium a tom
-raybeam o f-particles (alpha-p articles)
β-raybeam o f electrons
γ-raybeam o f highly energ etic photons
Key Equations
Wien’s displac ement la w
Stefan ’s law
Planck ’s constant
Energ y quantum o f radia tion
Planck ’s blackb ody radia tion la w
Maximum kinetic energ y
of a photo electron
Energ y of a photon
Energ y balanc e for photo electron
Cut-off fre quency
Relativis tic in variant
energ y equa tion
Energ y-momentum rela tion
for photon
Energ y of a photon6 • Chap ter Re view 283

Magnitude o f photon ’s momentum
Photon ’s line ar
momentum v ectorℏ
The C ompton w avelength
of an electron
The C ompton shift
The Balmer f ormula
The R ydberg f ormula
Bohr ’s firs t quantiza tion c ondition ℏ
Bohr ’s sec ond quantiza tion c ondition
Bohr ’s radius o f hydrog enℏ
Bohr ’s radius o f the nth orbit
Ground-s tate energ y value ,
ioniza tion limit
Electron ’s energ y in
the nth orbit
Ground s tate energ y of
hydrog en
The nth orbit o f
hydrog en-lik e ion
The nth energ y
of hydrog en-lik e ion
Energ y of a ma tter w ave
The de Broglie w avelength
The fre quency -wavelength rela tion
for ma tter w aves
Heisenb erg’s unc ertainty principle ℏ284 6 • Chap ter Re view
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Summar y
6.1Blackbody Radiation
•All bodies radia te energ y. The amount o f
radia tion a b ody emits dep ends on its
temp erature . The e xperimental W ien’s
displac ement la w states tha t the hot ter the b ody,
the shor ter the w avelength c orresp onding to the
emis sion p eak in the radia tion cur ve. The
experimental Stefan ’s law states tha t the total
power o f radia tion emit ted acros s the entire
spectr um o f wavelengths a t a giv en temp erature
is prop ortional to the f ourth p ower o f the K elvin
temp erature o f the radia ting b ody.
•Absorption and emis sion o f radia tion are
studie d within the mo del o f a blackb ody. In the
clas sical appro ach, the e xchang e of energ y
between radia tion and c avity w alls is
continuous . The clas sical appro ach do es not
explain the blackb ody radia tion cur ve.
•To explain the blackb ody radia tion cur ve,
Planck as sume d tha t the e xchang e of energ y
between radia tion and c avity w alls tak es plac e
only in discrete quanta o f energ y. Planck ’s
hypothesis o f energ y quanta le d to the
theoretic al Planck ’s radia tion la w, which a grees
with the e xperimental blackb ody radia tion
curve; it also e xplains W ien’s and Stefan ’s laws.
6.2Photoelec tric Ef fect
•The photo electric eff ect o ccurs when
photo electrons are ejecte d from a metal sur face
in resp onse to mono chroma tic radia tion
incident on the sur face. It has three
characteris tics: (1) it is ins tantaneous , (2) it
occurs only when the radia tion is a bove a cut -off
frequency , and (3) kinetic energies o f
photo electrons a t the sur face do not dep end o f
the intensity o f radia tion . The photo electric
effect c annot b e explaine d by clas sical theor y.
•We can e xplain the photo electric eff ect b y
assuming tha t radia tion c onsis ts of photons
(particles o f light). Each photon c arries a
quantum o f energ y. The energ y of a photon
dep ends only on its fre quency , which is the
frequency o f the radia tion . At the sur face, the
entire energ y of a photon is trans ferre d to one
photo electron .
•The maximum kinetic energ y of a photo electron
at the metal sur face is the diff erenc e between
the energ y of the incident photon and the w ork
function o f the metal . The w ork function is the
binding energ y of electrons to the metal sur face.Each metal has its o wn characteris tic w ork
function .
6.3The C omp ton Ef fect
•In the C ompton eff ect, X-rays scattere d off some
materials ha ve diff erent w avelengths than the
wavelength o f the incident X -rays. This
phenomenon do es not ha ve a clas sical
explana tion .
•The C ompton eff ect is e xplaine d by as suming
that radia tion c onsis ts of photons tha t collide
with w eakly b ound electrons in the targ et
material . Both electron and photon are tre ated
as rela tivis tic p articles . Conser vation la ws of the
total energ y and o f momentum are ob eyed in
collisions .
•Treating the photon as a p article with
momentum tha t can b e trans ferre d to an
electron le ads to a theoretic al Compton shift
that agrees with the w avelength shift me asure d
in the e xperiment . This pro vides evidenc e tha t
radia tion c onsis ts of photons .
•Compton sc attering is an inelas tic sc attering , in
which sc attere d radia tion has a long er
wavelength than tha t of incident radia tion .
6.4Bohr ’s Model o f the Hy drogen A tom
•Positions o f absorption and emis sion lines in the
spectr um o f atomic h ydrog en are giv en b y the
experimental R ydberg f ormula. Clas sical
physics c annot e xplain the sp ectr um o f atomic
hydrog en.
•The Bohr mo del o f hydrog en w as the firs t mo del
of atomic s tructure to c orrectly e xplain the
radia tion sp ectra o f atomic h ydrog en. It w as
prec eded by the R uther ford nucle ar mo del o f
the a tom . In R uther ford’s mo del, an a tom
consis ts of a p ositiv ely charg ed point -like
nucleus tha t contains almos t the entire mas s of
the a tom and o f neg ative electrons tha t are
located far a way from the nucleus .
•Bohr ’s mo del o f the h ydrog en a tom is b ased on
three p ostula tes: (1) an electron mo ves around
the nucleus in a circular orbit , (2) an electron ’s
angular momentum in the orbit is quantiz ed,
and (3) the chang e in an electron ’s energ y as it
mak es a quantum jump from one orbit to
another is alw ays ac comp anie d by the emis sion
or a bsorption o f a photon . Bohr ’s mo del is semi-
clas sical because it c ombines the clas sical
concept o f electron orbit (p ostula te 1) with the
new c oncept o f quantiza tion (p ostula tes 2 and6 • Chap ter Re view 285

3).
•Bohr ’s mo del o f the h ydrog en a tom e xplains the
emis sion and a bsorption sp ectra o f atomic
hydrog en and h ydrog en-lik e ions with lo w
atomic numb ers. It w as the firs t mo del to
intro duce the c oncept o f a quantum numb er to
describ e atomic s tates and to p ostula te
quantiza tion o f electron orbits in the a tom .
Bohr ’s mo del is an imp ortant s tep in the
development o f quantum mechanics , which
deals with man y-electron a toms .
6.5De Br oglie ’s Mat ter W aves
•De Broglie ’s hypothesis o f ma tter w aves
postula tes tha t an y particle o f ma tter tha t has
line ar momentum is also a w ave. The
wavelength o f a ma tter w ave as sociated with a
particle is in versely prop ortional to the
magnitude o f the p article ’s line ar momentum .
The sp eed of the ma tter w ave is the sp eed of the
particle .
•De Broglie ’s concept o f the electron ma tter w ave
provides a ra tionale f or the quantiza tion o f the
electron ’s angular momentum in Bohr ’s mo del
of the h ydrog en a tom .
•In the Da visson– Germer e xperiment , electrons
are sc attere d off a cr ystalline nick el sur face.
Diffraction p atterns o f electron ma tter w aves are
obser ved. The y are the evidenc e for the
existenc e of ma tter w aves. Ma tter w aves are
obser ved in diffraction e xperiments withvarious p articles .
6.6Wave-Particle Dualit y
•Wave-particle duality e xists in na ture: Under
some e xperimental c onditions , a p article acts as
a particle; under other e xperimental c onditions ,
a particle acts as a w ave. Conversely , under
some ph ysical circums tanc es, electroma gnetic
radia tion acts as a w ave, and under other
physical circums tanc es, radia tion acts as a
beam o f photons .
•Modern-era double -slit e xperiments with
electrons demons trated conclusiv ely tha t
electron-diffraction ima ges are f orme d because
of the w ave na ture o f electrons .
•The w ave-particle dual na ture o f particles and o f
radia tion has no clas sical explana tion .
•Quantum theor y tak es the w ave prop erty to b e
the fundamental prop erty of all p articles . A
particle is seen as a mo ving w ave packet. The
wave na ture o f particles imp oses a limita tion on
the simultaneous me asurement o f the p article ’s
position and momentum . Heisenb erg’s
unc ertainty principle sets the limits on
precision in such simultaneous me asurements .
•Wave-particle duality is e xploite d in man y
devic es, such as charg e-couple devic es (use d in
digital c ameras) or in the electron microsc opy of
the sc anning electron microsc ope (SEM) and the
transmis sion electron microsc ope (TEM).
Concep tual Ques tions
6.1Blackbody Radiation
1.Which sur face has a higher temp erature – the
surface of a y ellow star or tha t of a re d star?
2.Describ e wha t you w ould see when lo oking a t a
body whose temp erature is incre ased from 1000
K to 1,000,000 K .
3.Explain the c olor chang es in a hot b ody as its
temp erature is incre ased.
4.Specula te as to wh y UV light c auses sunburn ,
where as visible light do es not .
5.Two cavity radia tors are c onstructe d with w alls
made o f diff erent metals . At the same
temp erature , how w ould their radia tion sp ectra
differ?
6.Discus s wh y some b odies app ear black , other
bodies app ear re d, and s till other b odies app ear
white .
7.If ev erything radia tes electroma gnetic energ y,
why can w e not see objects a t room temp eraturein a dark ro om?
8.How much do es the p ower radia ted by a
blackb ody incre ase when its temp erature (in K )
is triple d?
6.2Photoelec tric Ef fect
9.For the same mono chroma tic light sourc e, would
the photo electric eff ect o ccur f or all metals?
10.In the interpreta tion o f the photo electric eff ect,
how is it kno wn tha t an electron do es not a bsorb
more than one photon?
11.Explain ho w you c an determine the w ork
function from a plot o f the s topping p otential
versus the fre quency o f the incident radia tion in
a photo electric eff ect e xperiment . Can y ou
determine the v alue o f Planck ’s constant from
this plot?
12.Supp ose tha t in the photo electric -effect
experiment w e mak e a plot o f the detecte d286 6 • Chap ter Re view
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

current v ersus the applie d potential diff erenc e.
Wha t inf orma tion do w e obtain from such a
plot? C an w e determine from it the v alue o f
Planck ’s constant? C an w e determine the w ork
function o f the metal?
13.Specula te ho w incre asing the temp erature o f a
photo electro de a ffects the outc omes o f the
photo electric eff ect e xperiment .
14.Which asp ects o f the photo electric eff ect c annot
be explaine d by clas sical ph ysics?
15.Is the photo electric eff ect a c onse quenc e of the
wave character o f radia tion or is it a
conse quenc e of the p article character o f
radia tion? Explain briefly .
16.The metals so dium , iron , and molyb denum
have work functions 2.5 e V, 3.9 e V, and 4.2 e V,
resp ectiv ely. Which o f these metals will emit
photo electrons when illumina ted with 400 nm
light?
6.3The C omp ton Ef fect
17.Discus s an y similarities and diff erenc es
between the photo electric and the C ompton
effects .
18.Which has a gre ater momentum: an UV photon
or an IR photon?
19.Does changing the intensity o f a
mono chroma tic light b eam a ffect the
momentum o f the individual photons in the
beam? Do es such a chang e affect the net
momentum o f the b eam?
20.Can the C ompton eff ect o ccur with visible light?
If so , will it b e detecta ble?
21.Is it p ossible in the C ompton e xperiment to
obser ve sc attere d X-rays tha t ha ve a shor ter
wavelength than the incident X -ray radia tion?
22.Sho w tha t the C ompton w avelength has the
dimension o f length .
23.At wha t scattering angle is the w avelength shift
in the C ompton eff ect e qual to the C ompton
wavelength?
6.4Bohr ’s Model o f the Hy drogen A tom
24.Explain wh y the p atterns o f bright emis sion
spectral lines ha ve an identic al sp ectral
position to the p attern o f dark a bsorption
spectral lines f or a giv en g aseous element .
25.Do the v arious sp ectral lines o f the h ydrog en
atom o verlap?
26.The Balmer series f or h ydrog en w as disc overed
before either the L yman or the P aschen series .
Why?27.When the a bsorption sp ectr um o f hydrog en a t
room temp erature is analyz ed, absorption lines
for the L yman series are f ound , but none are
found f or the Balmer series . Wha t do es this tell
us a bout the energ y state of mos t hydrog en
atoms a t room temp erature?
28.Hydrog en ac counts f or a bout 75% b y mas s of
the ma tter a t the sur faces o f mos t stars .
However, the a bsorption lines o f hydrog en are
strong est (of highes t intensity ) in the sp ectra o f
stars with a sur face temp erature o f about 9000
K. The y are w eaker in the sun sp ectr um and are
essentially none xistent in v ery hot
(temp eratures a bove 25,000 K ) or ra ther c ool
(temp eratures b elow 3500 K ) stars . Specula te as
to wh y sur face temp erature a ffects the
hydrog en a bsorption lines tha t we obser ve.
29.Discus s the similarities and diff erenc es
between Thomson ’s mo del o f the h ydrog en
atom and Bohr ’s mo del o f the h ydrog en a tom .
30.Discus s the w ay in which Thomson ’s mo del is
nonph ysical. Supp ort your argument with
experimental evidenc e.
31.If, in a h ydrog en a tom , an electron mo ves to an
orbit with a larg er radius , does the energ y of the
hydrog en a tom incre ase or decre ase?
32.How is the energ y conser ved when an a tom
mak es a transition from a higher to a lo wer
energ y state?
33.Supp ose an electron in a h ydrog en a tom mak es
a transition from the ( n+1 )th orbit to the nth
orbit . Is the w avelength o f the emit ted photon
long er for larg er values o fn, or f or smaller
values o fn?
34.Discus s wh y the allo wed energies o f the
hydrog en a tom are neg ative.
35.Can a h ydrog en a tom a bsorb a photon whose
energ y is gre ater than 13.6 e V?
36.Why can y ou see through glas s but not through
wood?
37.Do gra vitational f orces ha ve a signific ant eff ect
on a tomic energ y lev els?
38.Sho w tha t Planck ’s constant has the dimensions
of angular momentum .
6.5De Br oglie ’s Mat ter W aves
39.Which typ e of radia tion is mos t suita ble f or the
obser vation o f diffraction p atterns on
crystalline solids; radio w aves, visible light , or
X-rays? Explain .
40.Specula te as to ho w the diffraction p atterns o f a
typic al cr ystal w ould b e affecte d if were
used ins tead o f X-rays.6 • Chap ter Re view 287

41.If an electron and a proton are tra veling a t the
same sp eed, which one has the shor ter de
Broglie w avelength?
42.If a p article is ac celera ting , how do es this a ffect
its de Broglie w avelength?
43.Why is the w ave-like na ture o f ma tter not
obser ved ev ery da y for macrosc opic objects?
44.Wha t is the w avelength o f a neutron a t res t?
Explain .
45.Why do es the setup o f Da visson– Germer
experiment nee d to b e enclose d in a v acuum
chamb er? Discus s wha t result y ou e xpect when
the chamb er is not ev acua ted.
6.6Wave-Particle Dualit y
46.Give an e xample o f an e xperiment in which
light b ehaves as w aves. Giv e an e xample o f an
experiment in which light b ehaves as a s tream
of photons .47.Discus s: Ho w do es the inter ferenc e of water
waves diff er from the inter ferenc e of electrons?
How are the y analog ous?
48.Give at least one argument in supp ort of the
matter-wave hypothesis .
49.Give at least one argument in supp ort of the
particle -nature o f radia tion .
50.Explain the imp ortanc e of the Y oung double -slit
experiment .
51.Does the Heisenb erg unc ertainty principle
allow a p article to b e at res t in a designa ted
region in sp ace?
52.Can the de Broglie w avelength o f a p article b e
kno wn e xactly?
53.Do the photons o f red light pro duce better
resolution in a microsc ope than blue light
photons? Explain .
54.Discus s the main diff erenc e between an SEM
and a TEM.
Problems
6.1Blackbody Radiation
55.A 200- W he ater emits a 1.5-µm radia tion . (a)
Wha t value o f the energ y quantum do es it emit?
(b) As suming tha t the sp ecific he at of a 4.0-k g
body is how man y of these
photons mus t be absorb ed by the b ody to
incre ase its temp erature b y 2 K? (c) Ho w long
does the he ating pro cess in ( b) tak e, assuming
that all radia tion emit ted by the he ater g ets
absorb ed by the b ody?
56.A 900- W micro wave genera tor in an o ven
genera tes energ y quanta o f fre quency 2560
MHz. (a) Ho w man y energ y quanta do es it emit
per sec ond? ( b) Ho w man y energ y quanta mus t
be absorb ed by a p asta dish plac ed in the
radia tion c avity to incre ase its temp erature b y
45.0 K? As sume tha t the dish has a mas s of 0.5
kg and tha t its sp ecific he at is
(c) As sume tha t all energ y quanta emit ted by the
genera tor are a bsorb ed by the p asta dish . Ho w
long mus t we wait until the dish in ( b) is re ady?
57.(a) F or wha t temp erature is the p eak o f
blackb ody radia tion sp ectr um a t 400 nm? ( b) If
the temp erature o f a blackb ody is 800 K , at wha t
wavelength do es it radia te the mos t energ y?
58.The tungs ten elements o f inc andesc ent light
bulbs op erate at 3200 K . At wha t wavelength
does the filament radia te maximum energ y?
59.Inters tellar sp ace is fille d with radia tion o f
wavelength This radia tion is c onsidere dto b e a remnant o f the “big b ang .” Wha t is the
corresp onding blackb ody temp erature o f this
radia tion?
60.The radiant energ y from the sun re aches its
maximum a t a w avelength o f about 500.0 nm .
Wha t is the appro xima te temp erature o f the
sun’s sur face?
6.2Photoelec tric Ef fect
61.A photon has energ y 20 k eV. Wha t are its
frequency and w avelength?
62.The w avelengths o f visible light rang e from
appro xima tely 400 to 750 nm . Wha t is the
corresp onding rang e of photon energies f or
visible light?
63.Wha t is the long est wavelength o f radia tion tha t
can eject a photo electron from silv er? Is it in the
visible rang e?
64.Wha t is the long est wavelength o f radia tion tha t
can eject a photo electron from p otas sium , giv en
the w ork function o f potas sium 2.24 e V? Is it in
the visible rang e?
65.Estima te the binding energ y of electrons in
magnesium , giv en tha t the w avelength o f 337
nm is the long est wavelength tha t a photon ma y
have to eject a photo electron from ma gnesium
photo electro de.
66.The w ork function f or p otas sium is 2.26 e V.
Wha t is the cuto ff fre quency when this metal is
used as photo electro de? Wha t is the s topping
potential when f or the emit ted electrons when288 6 • Chap ter Re view
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

this photo electro de is e xposed to radia tion o f
frequency 1200 THz?
67.Estima te the w ork function o f aluminum , giv en
that the w avelength o f 304 nm is the long est
wavelength tha t a photon ma y ha ve to eject a
photo electron from aluminum photo electro de.
68.Wha t is the maximum kinetic energ y of
photo electrons ejecte d from so dium b y the
incident radia tion o f wavelength 450 nm?
69.A 120-nm UV radia tion illumina tes a silv er-
plated electro de. Wha t is the maximum kinetic
energ y of the ejecte d photo electrons?
70.A 400-nm violet light ejects photo electrons with
a maximum kinetic energ y of 0.860 e V from
sodium photo electro de. Wha t is the w ork
function o f sodium?
71.A 600-nm light falls on a photo electric sur face
and electrons with the maximum kinetic energ y
of 0.17 e V are emit ted. Determine (a) the w ork
function and ( b) the cuto ff fre quency o f the
surface. (c) Wha t is the s topping p otential when
the sur face is illumina ted with light o f
wavelength 400 nm?
72.The cuto ff wavelength f or the emis sion o f
photo electrons from a p articular sur face is 500
nm. Find the maximum kinetic energ y of the
ejecte d photo electrons when the sur face is
illumina ted with light o f wavelength 600 nm .
73.Find the w avelength o f radia tion tha t can eject
2.00- eV electrons from c alcium electro de. The
work function f or c alcium is 2.71 e V. In wha t
rang e is this radia tion?
74.Find the w avelength o f radia tion tha t can eject
0.10- eV electrons from p otas sium electro de.
The w ork function f or p otas sium is 2.24 e V. In
wha t rang e is this radia tion?
75.Find the maximum v elocity o f photo electrons
ejecte d by an 80-nm radia tion , if the w ork
function o f photo electro de is 4.73 e V.
6.3The C omp ton Ef fect
76.Wha t is the momentum o f a 589-nm y ellow
photon?
77.Wha t is the momentum o f a 4- cm micro wave
photon?
78.In a b eam o f white light ( wavelengths from 400
to 750 nm), wha t rang e of momentum c an the
photons ha ve?
79.Wha t is the energ y of a photon whose
momentum is ?
80.Wha t is the w avelength o f (a) a 12-k eV X-ray
photon; ( b) a 2.0-Me V-ray photon?
81.Find the momentum and energ y of a 1.0- Åphoton .
82.Find the w avelength and energ y of a photon
with momentum
83.A-ray photon has a momentum o f
Find its w avelength and
energ y.
84.(a) C alcula te the momentum o f a photon .
(b) F ind the v elocity o f an electron with the
same momentum . (c) Wha t is the kinetic energ y
of the electron , and ho w do es it c omp are to tha t
of the photon?
85.Sho w tha t and are c onsis tent
with the rela tivis tic f ormula
86.Sho w tha t the energ yEin eV of a photon is giv en
by where is its
wavelength in meters .
87.For c ollisions with free electrons , comp are the
Compton shift o f a photon sc attere d as an angle
of to tha t of a photon sc attere d at
88.X-rays of wavelength 12.5 pm are sc attere d
from a blo ck o f carbon. Wha t are the
wavelengths o f photons sc attere d at (a) (b)
and , (c) ?
6.4Bohr ’s Model o f the Hy drogen A tom
89.Calcula te the w avelength o f the firs t line in the
Lyman series and sho w tha t this line lies in the
ultra violet p art of the sp ectr um.
90.Calcula te the w avelength o f the fifth line in the
Lyman series and sho w tha t this line lies in the
ultra violet p art of the sp ectr um.
91.Calcula te the energ y chang es c orresp onding to
the transitions o f the h ydrog en a tom: (a) from
to (b) from to and (c)
from to ∞
92.Determine the w avelength o f the third Balmer
line (transition from to ).
93.Wha t is the fre quency o f the photon a bsorb ed
when the h ydrog en a tom mak es the transition
from the ground s tate to the state?
94.When a h ydrog en a tom is in its ground s tate,
wha t are the shor test and long est wavelengths
of the photons it c an a bsorb without b eing
ioniz ed?
95.When a h ydrog en a tom is in its third e xcide d
state, wha t are the shor test and long est
wavelengths o f the photons it c an emit?
96.Wha t is the long est wavelength tha t light c an
have if it is to b e capable o f ionizing the
hydrog en a tom in its ground s tate?
97.For an electron in a h ydrog en a tom in the
state, compute: (a) the angular momentum; ( b)6 • Chap ter Re view 289

the kinetic energ y; (c) the p otential energ y; and
(d) the total energ y.
98.Find the ioniza tion energ y of a h ydrog en a tom
in the f ourth energ y state.
99.It has b een me asure d tha t it re quire d 0.850 e V
to remo ve an electron from the h ydrog en a tom .
In wha t state w as the a tom b efore the ioniza tion
happ ened?
100 .Wha t is the radius o f a h ydrog en a tom when
the electron is in the firs t excited state?
101 .Find the shor test wavelength in the Balmer
series . In wha t part of the sp ectr um do es this
line lie?
102 .Sho w tha t the entire P aschen series lies in the
infrare d part of the sp ectr um.
103 .Do the Balmer series and the L yman series
overlap? Wh y? Wh y not? (Hint: c alcula te the
shor test Balmer line and the long est Lyman
line .)
104 .(a) Which line in the Balmer series is the firs t
one in the UV p art of the sp ectr um? ( b) Ho w
man y Balmer lines lie in the visible p art of the
spectr um? (c) Ho w man y Balmer lines lie in
the UV ?
105 .A emis sion line o f atomic h ydrog en
corresp onds to transition b etween the s tates
and Find
6.5De Br oglie ’s Mat ter W aves
106 .At wha t velocity will an electron ha ve a
wavelength o f 1.00 m?
107 .Wha t is the de Broglie w avelength o f an
electron tra velling a t a sp eed of
?
108 .Wha t is the de Broglie w avelength o f an
electron tha t is ac celera ted from res t through a
potential diff erenc e of 20 k V?
109 .Wha t is the de Broglie w avelength o f a proton
whose kinetic energ y is 2.0 Me V? 10.0 Me V?
110 .Wha t is the de Broglie w avelength o f a 10-k g
football pla yer running a t a sp eed of 8.0 m/s?
111 .(a) Wha t is the energ y of an electron whose de
Broglie w avelength is tha t of a photon o f yellow
light with w avelength 590 nm? ( b) Wha t is the
de Broglie w avelength o f an electron whose
energ y is tha t of the photon o f yellow light?
112 .The de Broglie w avelength o f a neutron is 0.01
nm. Wha t is the sp eed and energ y of this
neutron?
113 .Wha t is the w avelength o f an electron tha t is
moving a t a 3% o f the sp eed of light?
114 .At wha t velocity do es a proton ha ve a 6.0- fm
wavelength (a bout the siz e of a nucleus)? Giv eyour ans wer in units o fc.
115 .Wha t is the v elocity o f a 0.400-k g billiard b all if
its w avelength is 7.50 fm?
116 .Find the w avelength o f a proton tha t is mo ving
at 1.00% o f the sp eed of light ( when
6.6Wave-Particle Dualit y
117 .An AM radio transmit ter radia tes 500 kW a t a
frequency o f 760 kHz. Ho w man y photons p er
second do es the emit ter emit?
118 .Find the Lorentz factor and de Broglie ’s
wavelength f or a 50- GeV electron in a p article
accelera tor.
119 .Find the Lorentz factor and de Broglie ’s
wavelength f or a 1.0- TeV proton in a p article
accelera tor.
120 .Wha t is the kinetic energ y of a 0.01-nm
electron in a TEM?
121 .If electron is to b e diffracte d signific antly b y a
crystal, its w avelength mus t be about e qual to
the sp acing ,d, of crystalline planes . Assuming
estima te the p otential
differenc e through which an electron mus t be
accelera ted from res t if it is to b e diffracte d by
these planes .
122 .X-rays form ionizing radia tion tha t is
dang erous to living tis sue and undetecta ble to
the human e ye. Supp ose tha t a s tudent
rese archer w orking in an X -ray diffraction
laboratory is ac cidentally e xposed to a fa tal
dose o f radia tion . Calcula te the temp erature
incre ase o f the rese archer under the f ollowing
conditions: the energ y of X-ray photons is 200
keV and the rese archer a bsorbs
photons p er e ach kilogram o f body w eight
during the e xposure . Assume tha t the sp ecific
heat of the s tudent ’s body is
123 .Solar wind (radia tion) tha t is incident on the
top o f Ear th’s atmosphere has an a verage
intensity o f Supp ose tha t you are
building a solar sail tha t is to prop el a small to y
spaceship with a mas s of 0.1 k g in the sp ace
between the Interna tional S pace Sta tion and
the mo on. The sail is made from a v ery light
material , which p erfectly reflects the incident
radia tion . To as sess whether such a project is
feasible , ans wer the f ollowing ques tions ,
assuming tha t radia tion photons are incident
only in normal direction to the sail reflecting
surface. (a) Wha t is the radia tion pres sure
(force per ) of the radia tion falling on the
mirror -like sail? ( b) Giv en the radia tion
pres sure c ompute d in (a), wha t will b e the290 6 • Chap ter Re view
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

accelera tion o f the sp aceship when the sail has
of an are a of ? (c) Giv en the
accelera tion es tima te in ( b), ho w fas t will the
spaceship b e mo ving a fter 24 hours when it
starts from res t?
124 .Treat the human b ody as a blackb ody and
determine the p ercenta ge incre ase in the total
power o f its radia tion when its temp erature
incre ases from 98.6 F to 103 F.
125 .Sho w tha t Wien’s displac ement la w results
from Planck ’s radia tion la w. (Hint: subs titute
and write Planck ’s law in the f orm
where
Now, for fix edT, findthe p osition o f the maximum in I(x,T) by
solving f orxin the e qua tion )
126 .Sho w tha t Stefan ’s law results from Planck ’s
radia tion la w.Hint: To compute the total p ower
of blackb ody radia tion emit ted acros s the
entire sp ectr um o f wavelengths a t a giv en
temp erature , integra te Planck ’s law over the
entire sp ectr um∞
Use
the subs titution and the ta bula ted
value o f the integral
∞
Additional P roblems
127 .Determine the p ower intensity o f radia tion p er
unit w avelength emit ted at a w avelength o f
500.0 nm b y a blackb ody a t a temp erature o f
10,000 K .
128 .The HCl molecule oscilla tes a t a fre quency o f
87.0 THz. Wha t is the diff erenc e (in e V)
between its adjac ent energ y lev els?
129 .A quantum mechanic al oscilla tor vibra tes a t a
frequency o f 250.0 THz. Wha t is the minimum
energ y of radia tion it c an emit?
130 .In a bout 5 billion y ears, the sun will ev olve to a
red giant . Assume tha t its sur face temp erature
will decre ase to a bout half its present v alue o f
6000 K , while its present radius o f
will incre ase to
(which is the current Ear th-sun dis tanc e).
Calcula te the ra tio o f the total p ower emit ted
by the sun in its re d giant s tage to its present
power.
131 .A so dium lamp emits 2.0 W o f radiant energ y,
mos t of which has a w avelength o f about 589
nm. Estima te the numb er o f photons emit ted
per sec ond b y the lamp .
132 .Photo electrons are ejecte d from a
photo electro de and are detecte d at a dis tanc e
of 2.50 cm a way from the photo electro de. The
work function o f the photo electro de is 2.71 e V
and the incident radia tion has a w avelength o f
420 nm . Ho w long do es it tak e a photo electron
to tra vel to the detector?
133 .If the w ork function o f a metal is 3.2 e V, wha t is
the maximum w avelength tha t a photon c an
have to eject a photo electron from this metal
surface?134 .The w ork function o f a photo electric sur face is
2.00 e V. Wha t is the maximum sp eed of the
photo electrons emit ted from this sur face
when a 450-nm light falls on it?
135 .A 400-nm laser b eam is projecte d onto a
calcium electro de. The p ower o f the laser
beam is 2.00 m W and the w ork function o f
calcium is 2.31 e V. (a) Ho w man y
photo electrons p er sec ond are ejecte d? (b)
Wha t net p ower is c arrie d away by
photo electrons?
136 .(a) C alcula te the numb er o f photo electrons p er
second tha t are ejecte d from a 1.00-mm2area
of sodium metal b y a 500-nm radia tion with
intensity (the intensity o f sunlight
above Ear th’s atmosphere). ( b) Giv en the w ork
function o f the metal as 2.28 e V, wha t power is
carrie d away by these photo electrons?
137 .A laser with a p ower output o f 2.00 m W at a
400-nm w avelength is use d to project a b eam
of light onto a c alcium photo electro de. (a) Ho w
man y photo electrons le ave the c alcium
surface per sec ond? ( b) Wha t power is c arrie d
away by ejecte d photo electrons , giv en tha t the
work function o f calcium is 2.31 e V? (c)
Calcula te the photo current . (d) If the
photo electro de suddenly b ecomes electric ally
insula ted and the setup o f two electro des in
the circuit suddenly s tarts to act lik e a 2.00-pF
capacitor , how long will current flo w before the
capacitor v olta ge stops it?6 • Chap ter Re view 291

138 .The w ork function f or b arium is 2.48 e V. Find
the maximum kinetic energ y of the ejecte d
photo electrons when the b arium sur face is
illumina ted with: (a) radia tion emit ted by a
100-kW radio s tation bro adcasting a t 800 kHz;
(b) a 633-nm laser light emit ted from a
powerful He -Ne laser; and (c) a 434-nm blue
light emit ted by a small h ydrog en g as
discharg e tub e.
139 .(a) C alcula te the w avelength o f a photon tha t
has the same momentum as a proton mo ving
with 1% o f the sp eed of light in a v acuum . (b)
Wha t is the energ y of this photon in Me V? (c)
Wha t is the kinetic energ y of the proton in
MeV?
140 .(a) F ind the momentum o f a 100-k eV X-ray
photon . (b) F ind the v elocity o f a neutron with
the same momentum . (c) Wha t is the neutron ’s
kinetic energ y in e V?
141 .The momentum o f light , as it is f or p articles , is
exactly rev erse d when a photon is reflecte d
straight b ack from a mirror , assuming
negligible rec oil o f the mirror . The chang e in
momentum is twic e the photon ’s incident
momentum , as it is f or the p articles . Supp ose
that a b eam o f light has an intensity
and falls on a area of a
mirror and reflects from it . (a) C alcula te the
energ y reflecte d in 1.00 s . (b) Wha t is the
momentum imp arted to the mirror? (c) U se
Newton ’s sec ond la w to find the f orce on the
mirror . (d) Do es the as sumption o f no -rec oil
for the mirror seem re asona ble?
142 .A photon o f energ y 5.0 k eV collides with a
stationar y electron and is sc attere d at an angle
of Wha t is the energ y ac quire d by the
electron in the c ollision?
143 .A 0.75-nm photon is sc attere d by a s tationar y
electron . The sp eed of the electron ’s rec oil is
(a) F ind the w avelength shift o f
the photon . (b) F ind the sc attering angle o f the
photon .
144 .Find the maximum chang e in X -ray
wavelength tha t can o ccur due to C ompton
scattering . Do es this chang e dep end on the
wavelength o f the incident b eam?
145 .A photon o f wavelength 700 nm is incident on
a hydrog en a tom . When this photon is
absorb ed, the a tom b ecomes ioniz ed. Wha t is
the lo west possible orbit tha t the electron
could ha ve occupie d before b eing ioniz ed?146 .Wha t is the maximum kinetic energ y of an
electron such tha t a c ollision b etween the
electron and a s tationar y hydrog en a tom in its
ground s tate is definitely elas tic?
147 .Singly ioniz ed atomic helium is a
hydrog en-lik e ion . (a) Wha t is its ground-s tate
radius? ( b) C alcula te the energies o f its f our
lowest energ y states. (c) R epeat the
calcula tions f or the ion.
148 .A triply ioniz ed atom o f beryllium is a
hydrog en-lik e ion . When is in one o f its
excited states, its radius in this nth state is
exactly the same as the radius o f the firs t Bohr
orbit o f hydrog en. Find nand c ompute the
ioniza tion energ y for this s tate of
149 .In e xtreme -temp erature en vironments , such
as those e xisting in a solar c orona, a toms ma y
be ioniz ed by underg oing c ollisions with other
atoms . One e xample o f such ioniza tion in the
solar c orona is the presenc e of ions ,
detecte d in the F raunho fer sp ectr um. (a) B y
wha t factor do the energies o f the ion
scale c omp are to the energ y sp ectr um o f a
hydrog en a tom? ( b) Wha t is the w avelength o f
the firs t line in the P aschen series o f ? (c)
In wha t part of the sp ectr um are these lines
located?
150 .(a) C alcula te the ioniza tion energ y for (b)
Wha t is the minimum fre quency o f a photon
capable o f ionizing ?
151 .Exp eriments are p erforme d with ultrac old
neutrons ha ving v elocities as small as 1.00 m/
s. Find the w avelength o f such an ultrac old
neutron and its kinetic energ y.
152 .Find the v elocity and kinetic energ y of a
6.0- fm neutron . (Rest mas s energ y of neutron
is
153 .The sp acing b etween cr ystalline planes in the
NaCl cr ystal is 0.281 nm , as determine d by X-
ray diffraction with X -rays of wavelength 0.170
nm. Wha t is the energ y of neutrons in the
neutron b eam tha t pro duces diffraction p eaks
at the same lo cations as the p eaks obtaine d
with the X -rays?
154 .Wha t is the w avelength o f an electron
accelera ted from res t in a 30.0-k V potential
differenc e?
155 .Calcula te the v elocity o f a electron and
a potential diff erenc e use d to ac celera te it
from res t to this v elocity.292 6 • Chap ter Re view
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

156 .In a sup ercollider a t CERN , protons are
accelera ted to v elocities o f 0.25 c. Wha t are
their w avelengths a t this sp eed? Wha t are their
kinetic energies? If a b eam o f protons w ere to
gain its kinetic energ y in only one p ass
through a p otential diff erenc e, how high w ould
this p otential diff erenc e ha ve to b e? (R est mas s
energ y of a proton is
157 .Find the de Broglie w avelength o f an electron
accelera ted from res t in an X -ray tub e in the
potential diff erenc e of 100 k eV. (Rest mas s
energ y of an electron is
158 .The cuto ff wavelength f or the emis sion o f
photo electrons from a p articular sur face is
500 nm . Find the maximum kinetic energ y of
the ejecte d photo electrons when the sur face is
illumina ted with light o f wavelength 450 nm .
159 .Comp are the w avelength shift o f a photon
scattere d by a free electron to tha t of a photon
scattere d at the same angle b y a free proton .160 .The sp ectrometer use d to me asure the
wavelengths o f the sc attere d X-rays in the
Compton e xperiment is ac cura te to
Wha t is the minimum
scattering angle f or which the X -rays
interacting with the free electrons c an b e
distinguishe d from those interacting with the
atoms?
161 .Consider a h ydrog en-lik e ion where an
electron is orbiting a nucleus tha t has charg e
Deriv e the f ormulas f or the energ y
of the electron in nth orbit and the orbital
radius
162 .Assume tha t a h ydrog en a tom e xists in the
excited state for before dec aying
to the ground s tate. Ho w man y times do es the
electron orbit the proton nucleus during this
time? Ho w long do es it tak e Ear th to orbit the
sun this man y times?
163 .An a tom c an b e forme d when a neg ative muon
is capture d by a proton . The muon has the
same charg e as the electron and a mas s 207
times tha t of the electron . Calcula te the
frequency o f the photon emit ted when this
atom mak es the transition from to the
state. Assume tha t the muon is orbiting a
stationar y proton .6 • Chap ter Re view 293

294 6 • Chap ter Re view
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

INTR ODUCTIONCHAP TER 7
Quantum Mechanics
7.1Wave Functions
7.2The Heisenber g Uncer taint y Principle
7.3The Schrӧ dinger Equation
7.4The Quantum P article in a Bo x
7.5The Quantum Harmonic Oscillator
7.6The Quantum T unneling o f Particles thr ough P otential Barrier s
Quantum mechanics is a p owerful framew ork f or unders tanding the motions and
interactions o f particles a t small sc ales , such as a toms and molecules . The ide as b ehind quantum mechanics
often app ear quite s trang e. In man y ways, our ev eryday experienc e with the macrosc opic ph ysical w orld do es
not prep are us f or the microsc opic w orld o f quantum mechanics . The purp ose o f this chapter is to intro duce
you to this e xciting w orld .
Picture d above is a quantum-c omputer pro cessor. This devic e is the “brain ” of a quantum c omputer tha t
operates a t ne ar-absolute z ero temp eratures . Unlik e a digital c omputer , which enc odes inf orma tion in binar y
digits (definite s tates o f either z ero or one), a quantum c omputer enc odes inf orma tion in quantum bits or
Figur e7.1 A D-wave qubit pr ocessor: The br ain o f a quantum c omput er that enc odes inf ormation in quantum bits
to per form c omple x calculations . (credit: modification o f work b y D-Wave Sy stems , Inc.)
Chap ter Outline

qubits (mix ed states o f zero and one). Quantum c omputers are discus sed in the firs t section o f this chapter .
7.1Wave Functions
Learning Objectiv es
By the end o f this section, y ou wil l be able t o:
•Describe the s tatis tical interpr etation o f the w ave func tion
•Use the w ave func tion to de termine pr obabilities
•Calculate e xpec tation v alues o f position, momentum, and kine tic ener gy
In the prec eding chapter , we sa w tha t particles act in some c ases lik e particles and in other c ases lik e waves.
But wha t do es it me an f or a p article to “ act lik e a w ave”? Wha t precisely is “ waving ”? Wha t rules g overn ho w
this w ave chang es and prop agates? Ho w is the w ave function use d to mak e pre dictions? F or e xample , if the
amplitude o f an electron w ave is giv en b y a function o f position and time , , define d for all x,where
exactly is the electron? The purp ose o f this chapter is to ans wer these ques tions .
Using the W ave Function
A clue to the ph ysical me aning o f the w ave function is pro vide d by the two-slit inter ferenc eof
mono chroma tic light ( Figure 7.2 ). (See also Electroma gnetic W avesand Inter ferenc e.) The wave funct ion of a
light w ave is giv en b yE(x,t), and its energ y density is giv en b y , where Eis the electric field s trength . The
energ y of an individual photon dep ends only on the fre quency o f light , so is prop ortional to
the numb er o f photons . When light w aves from inter fere with light w aves from at the viewing screen (a
distanc eDaway), an inter ferenc e pattern is pro duced (p art (a) o f the figure). Bright fring es c orresp ond to
points o f constructiv e inter ferenc e of the light w aves, and dark fring es c orresp ond to p oints o f des tructiv e
inter ferenc e of the light w aves (p art (b)).
Supp ose the screen is initially une xposed to light . If the screen is e xposed to v ery weak light , the inter ferenc e
pattern app ears gradually ( Figure 7.2 (c), left to right). Individual photon hits on the screen app ear as dots . The
dot density is e xpecte d to b e larg e at locations where the inter ferenc e pattern will b e, ultima tely, the mos t
intense . In other w ords , the prob ability (p er unit are a) tha t a single photon will s trike a p articular sp ot on the
screen is prop ortional to the square o f the total electric field , at tha t point . Under the right c onditions , the
same inter ferenc e pattern dev elops f or ma tter p articles , such as electrons .296 7 • Quantum Mechanics
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Figur e7.2 Two-slit int erference of monochr omatic light. (a) Schematic o f two-slit int erference; (b) light int erference pat tern; (c)
interference pat tern buil t up gr adual ly under lo w-intensity light (left t o right).
INTER ACTIVE
Visit this interactiv e simula tion (https:/ /openstax.org/l/21intqua wavint) to le arn more a bout quantum w ave
inter ferenc e.
The square o f the ma tter w ave in one dimension has a similar interpreta tion as the square o f the electric
field . It giv es the prob ability tha t a p article will b e found a t a p articular p osition and time p er unit length ,
also c alled the prob abilit y densit y. The prob ability ( P) a p article is f ound in a narro w inter val (x,x + dx ) at time
tis theref ore
(Later, we define the ma gnitude square d for the g eneral c ase o f a function with “ima ginar y parts.”) This
prob abilis tic interpreta tion o f the w ave function is c alled the Born interpretat ion. Examples o f wave functions
and their squares f or a p articular time tare giv en in Figure 7.3 .7.17.1 • W ave Functions 297

Figur e7.3 Several examples o f wave functions and the c orresponding squar e of their w ave functions .
If the w ave function v aries slo wly o ver the inter val , the prob ability a p article is f ound in the inter val is
appro xima tely
Notice tha t squaring the w ave function ensures tha t the prob ability is p ositiv e. (This is analog ous to squaring
the electric field s trength—which ma y be positiv e or neg ative—to obtain a p ositiv e value o f intensity .) Ho wever,
if the w ave function do es not v ary slo wly, we mus t integra te:
This prob ability is jus t the are a under the function between xand . The prob ability o f finding
the p article “ somewhere ” (the normalizat ion c ondit ion) is
For a p article in tw o dimensions , the integra tion is o ver an are a and re quires a double integral; f or a p article in
three dimensions , the integra tion is o ver a v olume and re quires a triple integral . For no w, we stick to the
simple one -dimensional c ase.
EXAMPLE 7.1
Wher e Is the Bal l? (P art I)
A ball is c onstraine d to mo ve along a line inside a tub e of length L. The b all is e qually lik ely to b e found
anywhere in the tub e at some time t. Wha t is the prob ability o f finding the b all in the left half o f the tub e at tha t7.2
7.3
∞ ∞
∞∞
7.4298 7 • Quantum Mechanics
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

time? ( The ans wer is 50%, o f course , but ho w do w e get this ans wer b y using the prob abilis tic interpreta tion o f
the quantum mechanic al w ave function?)
Strategy
The firs t step is to write do wn the w ave function . The b all is e qually lik e to b e found an ywhere in the b ox, so
one w ay to describ e the b all with a constant wave function ( Figure 7.4 ). The normaliza tion c ondition c an b e
used to find the v alue o f the function and a simple integra tion o ver half o f the b ox yields the final ans wer.
Figur e7.4 Wave function f or a bal l in a tube o f length L.
Solution
The w ave function o f the b all c an b e writ ten as where Cis a c onstant , and
other wise . We can determine the c onstant Cby applying the normaliza tion c ondition ( we set to simplif y
the nota tion):
∞ ∞
∞∞
This integral c an b e brok en into three p arts: (1) neg ative infinity to z ero, (2) z ero to L, and (3) Lto infinity . The
particle is c onstraine d to b e in the tub e, so outside the tub e and the firs t and las t integra tions are z ero.
The a bove equa tion c an theref ore b e writ ten
The v alue Cdoes not dep end on xand c an b e tak en out o f the integral , so w e obtain
Integra tion giv es
To determine the prob ability o f finding the b all in the firs t half o f the b ox we ha ve7.1 • W ave Functions 299

Significanc e
The prob ability o f finding the b all in the firs t half o f the tub e is 50%, as e xpecte d. Tw o obser vations are
notew orthy. First, this result c orresp onds to the are a under the c onstant function from toL/2 (the are a of
a square left o fL/2). Sec ond , this c alcula tion re quires an integra tion o f the square of the w ave function . A
common mis take in p erforming such c alcula tions is to f orget to square the w ave function b efore integra tion .
EXAMPLE 7.2
Wher e Is the Bal l? (P art II)
A ball is a gain c onstraine d to mo ve along a line inside a tub e of length L. This time , the b all is f ound
pref erentially in the middle o f the tub e. One w ay to represent its w ave function is with a simple c osine function
(Figure 7.5 ). Wha t is the prob ability o f finding the b all in the las t one -quar ter o f the tub e?
Figur e7.5 Wave function f or a bal l in a tube o f length L, wher e the bal l is pr eferential ly in the middle o f the tube .
Strategy
We use the same s trategy as b efore. In this c ase, the w ave function has tw o unkno wn c onstants: One is
associated with the w avelength o f the w ave and the other is the amplitude o f the w ave. We determine the
amplitude b y using the b oundar y conditions o f the problem , and w e ev alua te the w avelength b y using the
normaliza tion c ondition . Integra tion o f the square o f the w ave function o ver the las t quar ter o f the tub e yields
the final ans wer. The c alcula tion is simplifie d by centering our c oordina te system on the p eak o f the w ave
function .
Solution
The w ave function o f the b all c an b e writ ten
where Ais the amplitude o f the w ave function and is its w ave numb er. Beyond this inter val, the
amplitude o f the w ave function is z ero b ecause the b all is c onfine d to the tub e. Requiring the w ave function to
termina te at the right end o f the tub e giv es
Evalua ting the w ave function a t gives300 7 • Quantum Mechanics
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

This e qua tion is sa tisfied if the argument o f the c osine is an integral multiple o f and so on . In
this c ase, we ha ve
or
Applying the normaliza tion c ondition giv es , so the w ave function o f the b all is
To determine the prob ability o f finding the b all in the las t quar ter o f the tub e, we square the function and
integra te:
Significanc e
The prob ability o f finding the b all in the las t quar ter o f the tub e is 9.1%. The b all has a definite w avelength
. If the tub e is o f macrosc opic length , the momentum o f the b all is
This momentum is much to o small to b e me asure d by an y human ins trument .
An Interpr etation o f the W ave Function
We are no w in p osition to b egin to ans wer the ques tions p osed at the b eginning o f this section . First, for a
traveling p article describ ed by , wha t is “ waving? ” Base d on the a bove discus sion , the
answer is a ma thema tical function tha t can, among other things , be use d to determine where the p article is
likely to b e when a p osition me asurement is p erforme d. Sec ond , how is the w ave function use d to mak e
predictions? If it is nec essary to find the prob ability tha t a p article will b e found in a c ertain inter val, square
the w ave function and integra te over the inter val of interes t. Soon, you will le arn so on tha t the w ave function
can b e use d to mak e man y other kinds o f pre dictions , as w ell.
Third , if a ma tter w ave is giv en b y the w ave function ,where exactly is the p article? Tw o ans wers e xist:
(1) when the obser veris not looking (or the p article is not b eing other wise detecte d), the p article is ev erywhere
∞ ∞; and (2) when the obser verislooking (the p article is b eing detecte d), the p article “jumps into ” a
particular p osition s tate with a prob ability giv en b y —a pro cess called
state re duct ion orwave funct ion c ollapse . This ans wer is c alled the Copenha gen interpretat ion of the w ave
function , or o f quantum mechanics .
To illus trate this interpreta tion , consider the simple c ase o f a p article tha t can o ccup y a small c ontainer either
at or (Figure 7.6 ). In clas sical ph ysics , we as sume the p article is lo cated either a t or when the
obser ver is not lo oking . Ho wever, in quantum mechanics , the p article ma y exist in a s tate of indefinite
position—tha t is, it ma y be located at and when the obser ver is not lo oking . The as sumption tha t a
particle c an only ha ve one v alue o f position ( when the obser ver is not lo oking ) is a bandone d. Similar
comments c an b e made o f other me asura ble quantities , such as momentum and energ y.7.1 • W ave Functions 301

Figur e7.6 A tw o-state system o f position o f a par ticle .
The bizarre c onse quenc es o f the C openha gen interpreta tion o f quantum mechanics are illus trated by a
creative thought e xperiment firs t articula ted by Er win Schrö ding er (National Geographic , 2013) ( Figure 7.7 ):
“A cat is plac ed in a s teel b ox along with a Geig er counter , a vial o f poison , a hammer , and a radio activ e
subs tanc e. When the radio activ e subs tanc e dec ays, the Geig er detects it and trigg ers the hammer to rele ase
the p oison , which subse quently kills the c at. The radio activ e dec ay is a random [prob abilis tic] pro cess, and
there is no w ay to pre dict when it will happ en. Physicis ts sa y the a tom e xists in a s tate kno wn as a
superposition—b oth dec ayed and not dec ayed at the same time . Until the b ox is op ened, an obser ver do esn’t
kno w whether the c at is aliv e or de ad—b ecause the c at’s fate is intrinsic ally tie d to whether or not the a tom has
decayed and the c at would [ac cording to the C openha gen interpreta tion] b e “living and de ad ... in e qual p arts”
until it is obser ved.”
Figur e7.7 Schr öding er’s cat .
Schrö ding er to ok the a bsurd implic ations o f this thought e xperiment (a c at simultaneously de ad and aliv e) as
an argument a gains t the C openha gen interpreta tion . Ho wever, this interpreta tion remains the mos t commonly
taught view o f quantum mechanics .
Two-state systems ( left and right , atom dec ays and do es not dec ay, and so on) are o ften use d to illus trate the
principles o f quantum mechanics . These s ystems find man y applic ations in na ture , including electron spin
and mix ed states o f particles , atoms , and ev en molecules . Tw o-state systems are also finding applic ation in the
quantum c omputer , as mentione d in the intro duction o f this chapter . Unlik e a digital c omputer , which enc odes
informa tion in binar y digits (z eroes and ones), a quantum c omputer s tores and manipula tes da ta in the f orm
of quantum bits , or qubits . In g eneral , aqubit is not in a s tate of zero or one , but ra ther in a mix ed state of zero
and one. If a larg e numb er o f qubits are plac ed in the same quantum s tate, the me asurement o f an individual
qubit w ould pro duce a z ero with a prob ability p, and a one with a prob ability Man y scientis ts believ e
that quantum c omputers are the future o f the c omputer indus try.302 7 • Quantum Mechanics
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Comple x Conjugates
Later in this section , you will see ho w to use the w ave function to describ e particles tha t are “free ” or b ound b y
forces to other p articles . The sp ecific f orm o f the w ave function dep ends on the details o f the ph ysical system .
A peculiarity o f quantum theor y is tha t these functions are usually comple x funct ions. A c omple x function is
one tha t contains one or more ima ginar y numb ers . Exp erimental me asurements pro duce re al
(nonima ginar y) numb ers only , so the a bove pro cedure to use the w ave function mus t be slightly mo difie d. In
general , the prob ability tha t a p article is f ound in the narro w inter val (x,x + dx ) at time tis giv en b y
where is the c omple x conjug ate of the w ave function . The c omple x conjug ate of a function is obtaining
by replacing ev ery occurrenc e of in tha t function with . This pro cedure elimina tes c omple x
numb ers in all pre dictions b ecause the pro duct is alw ays a re al numb er.
CHE CK Y OUR UNDER STANDING 7.1
If , wha t is the pro duct ?
Consider the motion o f a free p article tha t mo ves along the x-direction . As the name sugg ests, a free p article
experienc es no f orces and so mo ves with a c onstant v elocity. As w e will see in a la ter section o f this chapter , a
formal quantum mechanic al tre atment o f a free p article indic ates tha t its w ave function has re aland comple x
parts. In p articular , the w ave function is giv en b y
where Ais the amplitude ,kis the w ave numb er, and is the angular fre quency . Using Euler ’s formula,
this e qua tion c an b e writ ten in the f orm
where is the phase angle . If the w ave function v aries slo wly o ver the inter val the prob ability o f finding
the p article in tha t inter val is
IfAhas re al and c omple x parts , where aand bare re al constants), then
Notice tha t the c omple x numb ers ha ve vanishe d. Thus ,
is a re al quantity . The interpreta tion o f as a prob ability density ensures tha t the pre dictions o f
quantum mechanics c an b e check ed in the “re al w orld .”
CHE CK Y OUR UNDER STANDING 7.2
Supp ose tha t a p article with energ yEis mo ving along the x-axis and is c onfine d in the region b etween 0 and L.
One p ossible w ave function is
ℏ
Determine the normaliza tion c onstant .7.57.1 • W ave Functions 303

Expec tation V alues
In clas sical mechanics , the solution to an e qua tion o f motion is a function o f a me asura ble quantity , such as
x(t), where xis the p osition and tis the time . Note tha t the p article has one v alue o f position f or an y time t. In
quantum mechanics , however, the solution to an e qua tion o f motion is a w ave function , The p article
has man y values o f position f or an y time t, and only the prob ability density o f finding the p article , ,
can b e kno wn. The a verage value o f position f or a larg e numb er o f particles with the same w ave function is
expecte d to b e
This is c alled the expectat ion v alue of the p osition . It is usually writ ten
where the xis sandwiche d between the w ave functions . The re ason f or this will b ecome app arent so on.
Formally ,xis called the posit ion op erator .
At this p oint , it is imp ortant to s tres s tha t a w ave function c an b e writ ten in terms o f other quantities as w ell,
such as v elocity ( v), momentum ( p), and kinetic energ y (K). The e xpecta tion v alue o f momentum , for e xample ,
can b e writ ten
Where dpis use d ins tead o fdxto indic ate an infinitesimal inter val in momentum . In some c ases , we kno w the
wave function in p osition , but seek the e xpecta tion o f momentum . The pro cedure f or doing this is
where the quantity in p arentheses , sandwiche d between the w ave functions , is c alled the momentum
operator in the x-direction . [The momentum op erator in Equa tion 7.9 is said to b e the p osition-sp ace
representa tion o f the momentum op erator.] The momentum op erator mus t act (op erate) on the w ave function
to the right , and then the result mus t be multiplie d by the c omple x conjug ate of the w ave function on the left ,
before integra tion . The momentum op erator in the x-direction is sometimes denote d
Momentum op erators f or the y- and z-directions are define d similarly . This op erator and man y others are
deriv ed in a more adv anced course in mo dern ph ysics . In some c ases , this deriv ation is rela tively simple . For
example , the kinetic energ y op erator is jus t∞∞
∞∞
7.6
∞∞
7.7
∞∞
7.8
∞∞
ℏ 7.9
ℏ 7.10304 7 • Quantum Mechanics
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Thus , if w e seek an e xpecta tion v alue o f kinetic energ y of a p article in one dimension , two suc cessive ordinar y
deriv atives o f the w ave function are re quire d before integra tion .
Exp ecta tion-v alue c alcula tions are o ften simplifie d by exploiting the s ymmetr y of wave functions . Symmetric
wave functions c an b e ev en or o dd. An even funct ion is a function tha t satisfies
In contras t, an odd funct ion is a function tha t satisfies
An e xample o f even and o dd functions is sho wn in Figure 7.8 . An ev en function is s ymmetric a bout the y-axis .
This function is pro duced by reflecting forx> 0 a bout the v erticaly-axis . By comp arison , an o dd function
is genera ted by reflecting the function a bout the y-axis and then a bout the x-axis . (An o dd function is also
referre d to as an anti-symmetric funct ion.)
Figur e7.8 Examples o f even and odd w ave functions .
In g eneral , an ev en function times an ev en function pro duces an ev en function . A simple e xample o f an ev en
function is the pro duct (even times ev en is ev en). Similarly , an o dd function times an o dd function
produces an ev en function , such as xsinx(odd times o dd is ev en). Ho wever, an o dd function times an ev en
function pro duces an o dd function , such as (odd times ev en is o dd). The integral o ver all sp ace of an o dd
function is z ero, because the total are a of the function a bove the x-axis c ancels the (neg ative) are a below it. As
the ne xt example sho ws, this prop erty of odd functions is v ery useful .
EXAMPLE 7.3
Expecta tion V alue (P art I)
The normaliz ed wave function o f a p article is
Find the e xpecta tion v alue o f position .
Strategy
Subs titute the w ave function into Equa tion 7.7 and ev alua te. The p osition op erator intro duces a multiplic ative
factor only , so the p osition op erator nee d not b e “sandwiche d.”
Solution
First multiply , then integra te:ℏ ℏ7.11
7.12
7.137.1 • W ave Functions 305

∞∞

∞∞
∞∞
Significanc e
The function in the integrand is odd sinc e it is the pro duct o f an o dd function ( x) and an ev en
function . The integral v anishes b ecause the total are a of the function a bout the x-axis c ancels the
(neg ative) are a below it. The result is not surprising sinc e the prob ability density function is
symmetric a bout .
EXAMPLE 7.4
Expecta tion V alue (P art II)
The time -dep endent w ave function o f a p article c onfine d to a region b etween 0 and Lis
where is angular fre quency and Eis the energ y of the p article . (Note: The function v aries as a sine b ecause o f
the limits (0 to L). When the sine factor is z ero and the w ave function is z ero, consis tent with the
boundar y conditions .) Calcula te the e xpecta tion v alues o f position , momentum , and kinetic energ y.
Strategy
We mus t firs t normaliz e the w ave function to find A. Then w e use the op erators to c alcula te the e xpecta tion
values .
Solution
Computa tion o f the normaliza tion c onstant:
The e xpecta tion v alue o f position is
The e xpecta tion v alue o f momentum in the x-direction also re quires an integral . To set this integral up , the
associated op erator mus t— by rule—act to the right on the w ave function :
ℏ ℏ
Theref ore, the e xpecta tion v alue o f momentum is
The function in the integral is a sine function with a w avelength e qual to the width o f the w ell,L—an o dd
function a bout . As a result , the integral v anishes .
The e xpecta tion v alue o f kinetic energ y in the x-direction re quires the as sociated op erator to act on the w ave306 7 • Quantum Mechanics
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

function:
ℏ ℏ ℏ
Thus , the e xpecta tion v alue o f the kinetic energ y is

Significanc e
The a verage position o f a larg e numb er o f particles in this s tate is L/2. The a verage momentum o f these
particles is z ero b ecause a giv en p article is e qually lik ely to b e mo ving right or left . Ho wever, the p article is not
at res t because its a verage kinetic energ y is not z ero. Finally , the prob ability density is

This prob ability density is larg est at location L/2 and is z ero a t and a t Note tha t these c onclusions
do not dep end e xplicitly on time .
CHE CK Y OUR UNDER STANDING 7.3
For the p article in the a bove example , find the prob ability o f locating it b etween p ositions 0 and L/4
Quantum mechanics mak es man y surprising pre dictions . Ho wever, in 1920, Niels Bohr (f ounder o f the Niels
Bohr Ins titute in C openha gen, from which w e get the term “ Copenha gen interpreta tion ”) as serted tha t the
predictions o f quantum mechanics and clas sical mechanics mus t agree f or all macrosc opic s ystems , such as
orbiting planets , bouncing b alls, rocking chairs , and springs . This corresp ondenc e principle is no w generally
accepte d. It sugg ests the r ules o f clas sical mechanics are an appro xima tion o f the r ules o f quantum mechanics
for systems with v ery larg e energies . Quantum mechanics describ es b oth the microsc opic and macrosc opic
world , but clas sical mechanics describ es only the la tter.
7.2The Heisenber g Uncer taint y Principle
Learning Objectiv es
By the end o f this section, y ou wil l be able t o:
•Describe the phy sical meaning o f the position-momentum uncer taint y relation
•Explain the origins o f the uncer taint y principle in quantum theor y
•Describe the phy sical meaning o f the ener gy-time uncer taint y relation
Heisenb erg’s unc ertaint y principle is a k ey principle in quantum mechanics . Very roughly , it s tates tha t if w e
kno weverything about where a p article is lo cated (the unc ertainty o f position is small), w e kno wnothing about
its momentum (the unc ertainty o f momentum is larg e), and vic e versa. V ersions o f the unc ertainty principle
also e xist for other quantities as w ell, such as energ y and time . We discus s the momentum-p osition and
energ y-time unc ertainty principles sep arately.7.2 • The Heisenber g Uncer taint y Principle 307

Momentum and P osition
To illus trate the momentum-p osition unc ertainty principle , consider a free p article tha t mo ves along the
x-direction . The p article mo ves with a c onstant v elocity uand momentum . According to de Broglie ’s
rela tions , ℏ and ℏ. As discus sed in the previous section , the w ave function f or this p article is
given b y
and the prob ability density
isunif orm and indep endent o f time . The p article is e qually lik ely
to b e found an ywhere along the x-axis but has definite v alues o f wavelength and w ave numb er, and theref ore
momentum . The unc ertainty o f position is infinite ( we are c ompletely unc ertain a bout p osition) and the
unc ertainty o f the momentum is z ero ( we are c ompletely c ertain a bout momentum). This ac count o f a free
particle is c onsis tent with Heisenb erg’s unc ertainty principle .
Similar s tatements c an b e made o f localized particles . In quantum theor y, a lo calized particle is mo dele d by a
line ar sup erposition o f free -particle (or plane -wave) states c alled awave packet. An e xample o f a w ave packet
is sho wn in Figure 7.9 . A w ave packet contains man y wavelengths and theref ore b y de Broglie ’s rela tions man y
momenta—p ossible in quantum mechanics! This p article also has man y values o f position , although the
particle is c onfine d mos tly to the inter val . The p article c an b e better lo calized can b e decre ased) if
more plane -wave states o f diff erent w avelengths or momenta are adde d tog ether in the right w ay is
incre ased). A ccording to Heisenb erg, these unc ertainties ob ey the f ollowing rela tion .
This rela tion e xpres ses Heisenb erg’s unc ertainty principle . It plac es limits on wha t we can kno w about a
particle from simultaneous me asurements o f position and momentum . If is larg e, is small , and vic e
versa. Equa tion 7.15 can b e deriv ed in a more adv anced course in mo dern ph ysics . Reflecting on this rela tion
in his w ork The Ph ysical Principles o f the Quantum Theor y, Heisenb erg wrote “ Any use o f the w ords ‘p osition ’
and ‘ velocity ’ with ac curacy e xceeding tha t giv en b y [the rela tion] is jus t as me aningles s as the use o f words
whose sense is not define d.”
Figur e7.9 Adding t ogether se veral plane w aves o f diff erent w avelengths can pr oduc e a w ave that is r elativ ely localiz ed. 7.14
The Heisenber g Uncer taint y Principle
The pro duct o f the unc ertainty in p osition o f a p article and the unc ertainty in its momentum c an nev er b e
less than one -half o f the re duced Planck c onstant:
ℏ 7.15308 7 • Quantum Mechanics
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Note tha t the unc ertainty principle has nothing to do with the precision o f an e xperimental app aratus. Even f or
perfect me asuring devic es, these unc ertainties w ould remain b ecause the y origina te in the w ave-like na ture o f
matter. The precise v alue o f the pro duct dep ends on the sp ecific f orm o f the w ave function .
Interes tingly , the G aussian function (or b ell-cur ve dis tribution) giv es the minimum v alue o f the unc ertainty
product: ℏ
EXAMPLE 7.5
The Unc ertainty P rinciple L arge and Smal l
Determine the minimum unc ertainties in the p ositions o f the f ollowing objects if their sp eeds are kno wn with a
precision o f : (a) an electron and ( b) a b owling b all o f mas s 6.0 k g.
Strategy
Given the unc ertainty in sp eed , we ha ve to firs t determine the unc ertainty in momentum
and then in vertEqua tion 7.15 to find the unc ertainty in p osition ℏ .
Solution
a.For the electron:

ℏ

b.For the b owling b all:

ℏ

Significanc e
Unlik e the p osition unc ertainty f or the electron , the p osition unc ertainty f or the b owling b all is imme asura bly
small . Planck ’s constant is v ery small , so the limita tions imp osed by the unc ertainty principle are not
notic eable in macrosc opic s ystems such as a b owling b all.
EXAMPLE 7.6
Unc ertainty and the Hy drogen A tom
Estima te the ground-s tate energ y of a h ydrog en a tom using Heisenb erg’s unc ertainty principle . (Hint :
According to e arly e xperiments , the siz e of a h ydrog en a tom is appro xima tely 0.1 nm .)
Strategy
An electron b ound to a h ydrog en a tom c an b e mo dele d by a p article b ound to a one -dimensional b ox of length
The ground-s tate w ave function o f this s ystem is a half w ave, like tha t giv en in Example 7.1 . This
is the larg est wavelength tha t can “fit ” in the b ox, so the w ave function c orresp onds to the lo west energ y state.
Note tha t this function is v ery similar in shap e to a G aussian ( bell cur ve) function . We can tak e the a verage
energ y of a p article describ ed by this function ( E) as a g ood es tima te of the ground s tate energ y . This
average energ y of a p article is rela ted to its a verage of the momentum square d, which is rela ted to its
momentum unc ertainty .
Solution
To solv e this problem , we mus t be sp ecific a bout wha t is me ant b y “unc ertainty o f position ” and “unc ertainty7.2 • The Heisenber g Uncer taint y Principle 309

of momentum .” We identif y the unc ertainty o f position with the s tandard devia tion o f position , and
the unc ertainty o f momentum with the s tandard devia tion o f momentum . For the G aussian function ,
the unc ertainty pro duct is
ℏ
where
The p article is e qually lik ely to b e mo ving left as mo ving right , so . Also, the unc ertainty o f position is
comp arable to the siz e of the b ox, so The es tima ted ground s tate energ y is theref ore
ℏ ℏ ℏ
Multiplying numera tor and denomina tor b y gives
ℏ
Significanc e
Base d on e arly es tima tes o f the siz e of a h ydrog en a tom and the unc ertainty principle , the ground-s tate energ y
of a h ydrog en a tom is in the e V rang e. The ioniza tion energ y of an electron in the ground-s tate energ y is
appro xima tely 10 e V, so this pre diction is roughly c onfirme d. (Note: The pro duct ℏis often a useful v alue in
performing c alcula tions in quantum mechanics .)
Ener gy and Time
Another kind o f unc ertainty principle c oncerns unc ertainties in simultaneous me asurements o f the energ y of
a quantum s tate and its lif etime ,
where is the unc ertainty in the energ y me asurement and is the unc ertainty in the lif etime
measurement . The ener gy-time unc ertaint y principle does not result from a rela tion o f the typ e expres sed
byEqua tion 7.15 for technic al re asons b eyond this discus sion . Nevertheles s, the g eneral me aning o f the
energ y-time principle is tha t a quantum s tate tha t exists for only a shor t time c annot ha ve a definite energ y.
The re ason is tha t the fre quency o f a s tate is in versely prop ortional to time and the fre quency c onnects with
the energ y of the s tate, so to me asure the energ y with g ood precision , the s tate mus t be obser ved for man y
cycles .
To illus trate, consider the e xcited states o f an a tom . The finite lif etimes o f these s tates c an b e de duced from the
shap es o f spectral lines obser ved in a tomic emis sion sp ectra. Each time an e xcited state dec ays, the emit ted
energ y is slightly diff erent and , theref ore, the emis sion line is characteriz ed by adistribution of spectral
frequencies (or w avelengths) o f the emit ted photons . As a result , all sp ectral lines are characteriz ed by sp ectral
widths . The a verage energ y of the emit ted photon c orresp onds to the theoretic al energ y of the e xcited state
and giv es the sp ectral lo cation o f the p eak o f the emis sion line . Shor t-lived states ha ve bro ad sp ectral widths
and long-liv ed states ha ve narro w sp ectral widths .ℏ7.16310 7 • Quantum Mechanics
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

EXAMPLE 7.7
Atomic T ransitions
An a tom typic ally e xists in an e xcited state for a bout . Estima te the unc ertainty in the
frequency o f emit ted photons when an a tom mak es a transition from an e xcited state with the simultaneous
emis sion o f a photon with an a verage fre quency o f . Is the emit ted radia tion
mono chroma tic?
Strategy
We invertEqua tion 7.16 to obtain the energ y unc ertainty ℏ and c ombine it with the photon energ y
to obtain . To es tima te whether or not the emis sion is mono chroma tic, we ev alua te .
Solution
The spre ad in photon energies is . Theref ore,
ℏ ℏ
Significanc e
Because the emit ted photons ha ve their fre quencies within percent o f the a verage fre quency , the
emit ted radia tion c an b e considere d mono chroma tic.
CHE CK Y OUR UNDER STANDING 7.4
A so dium a tom mak es a transition from the firs t excited state to the ground s tate, emit ting a 589.0-nm photon
with energ y 2.105 e V. If the lif etime o f this e xcited state is , wha t is the unc ertainty in energ y of
this e xcited state? Wha t is the width o f the c orresp onding sp ectral line?
7.3The Schrӧ dinger Equation
Learning Objectiv es
By the end o f this section, y ou wil l be able t o:
•Describe the r ole Schrӧ dinger ’s equation play s in quantum mechanics
•Explain the dif ference be tween time -dependent and -independent Schrӧ dinger ’s equations
•Interpr et the solutions o f Schrӧ dinger ’s equation
In the prec eding tw o sections , we describ ed ho w to use a quantum mechanic al w ave function and discus sed
Heisenb erg’s unc ertainty principle . In this section , we present a c omplete and f ormal theor y of quantum
mechanics tha t can b e use d to mak e pre dictions . In dev eloping this theor y, it is helpful to review the w ave
theor y of light . For a light w ave, the electric field E(x,t) obeys the rela tion
where cis the sp eed of light and the s ymb ol represents a partial deriv ative. (Recall from Oscilla tions that a
partial deriv ative is closely rela ted to an ordinar y deriv ative, but in volves functions o f more than one v aria ble.
When taking the p artial deriv ative of a function b y a c ertain v aria ble, all other v aria bles are held c onstant .) A
light w ave consis ts of a v ery larg e numb er o f photons , so the quantity can interprete d as a prob ability
density o f finding a single photon a t a p articular p oint in sp ace (for e xample , on a viewing screen).
There are man y solutions to this e qua tion . One solution o f particular imp ortanc e is7.177.3 • The Schrӧdinger Equation 311

where Ais the amplitude o f the electric field ,kis the w ave numb er, and is the angular fre quency . Combing
this e qua tion with Equa tion 7.17 gives
According to de Broglie ’s equa tions , we ha ve ℏ and ℏ. Subs tituting these e qua tions in Equa tion
7.19 gives
or
Theref ore, according to Eins tein ’s general energ y-momentum e qua tion ( Equa tion 5.11 ),Equa tion 7.17
describ es a p article with a z ero res t mas s. This is c onsis tent with our kno wledge of a photon .
This pro cess can b e rev erse d. We can b egin with the energ y-momentum e qua tion o f a p article and then ask
wha t wave equa tion c orresp onds to it . The energ y-momentum e qua tion o f a nonrela tivis tic p article in one
dimension is
where pis the momentum ,mis the mas s, and Uis the p otential energ y of the p article . The w ave equa tion tha t
goes with it turns out to b e a k ey equa tion in quantum mechanics , calledSchrӧding er’s time -dep endent
equat ion.
As describ ed in Potential Energ y and C onser vation o f Energ y, the f orce on the p article describ ed by this
equa tion is giv en b y
This e qua tion pla ys a role in quantum mechanics similar to N ewton ’s sec ond la w in clas sical mechanics . Onc e
the p otential energ y of a p article is sp ecifie d—or, equiv alently , onc e the f orce on the p article is sp ecifie d—w e
can solv e this diff erential e qua tion f or the w ave function . The solution to N ewton ’s sec ond la w equa tion (also a
differential e qua tion) in one dimension is a function x(t) tha t specifies where an object is a t an y time t. The
solution to Schrӧding er’s time -dep endent e qua tion pro vides a to ol—the w ave function—tha t can b e use d to
determine where the p article is likelyto b e. This e qua tion c an b e also writ ten in tw o or three dimensions .
Solving Schrӧding er’s time -dep endent e qua tion o ften re quires the aid o f a c omputer .
Consider the sp ecial c ase o f a free p article . A free p article e xperienc es no f orce Base d on Equa tion
7.24 , this re quires only tha t
For simplicity , we set . Schrӧding er’s equa tion then re duces to7.18
7.19
7.20
7.21
7.22
The Schrӧ dinger Time -Dependent Equation
The e qua tion describing the energ y and momentum o f a w ave function is kno wn as the Schrӧding er
equa tion:
ℏ
ℏ7.23
7.24
7.25312 7 • Quantum Mechanics
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

A valid solution to this e qua tion is
Not surprisingly , this solution c ontains an ima ginar y numb er because the diff erential e qua tion
itself c ontains an ima ginar y numb er. As s tres sed before, however, quantum-mechanic al pre dictions dep end
only on , which yields c ompletely re al values . Notice tha t the re al plane -wave solutions ,
and do not ob ey Schrö ding er’s equa tion . The tempta tion
to think tha t a w ave function c an b e seen , touche d, and f elt in na ture is elimina ted by the app earanc e of an
ima ginar y numb er. In Schrӧding er’s theor y of quantum mechanics , the w ave function is merely a to ol for
calcula ting things .
If the p otential energ y function ( U) do es not dep end on time , it is p ossible to sho w tha t
satisfies Schrӧding er’s time -dep endent e qua tion , where is a time -indep endent function and is a
space-indep endent function . In other w ords , the w ave function is separableinto tw o parts: a sp ace-only p art
and a time -only p art. The factor is sometimes ref erre d to as a time -mo dulat ion f actor sinc e it mo difies
the sp ace-only function . According to de Broglie , the energ y of a ma tter w ave is giv en b y ℏ, where Eis
its total energ y. Thus , the a bove equa tion c an also b e writ ten as
Any line ar combina tion o f such s tates (mix ed state of energ y or momentum) is also v alid solution to this
equa tion . Such s tates c an, for e xample , describ e a lo calized particle (see Figure 7.9 )
CHE CK Y OUR UNDER STANDING 7.5
A particle with mas smis mo ving along the x-axis in a p otential giv en b y the p otential energ y function
. Compute the pro duct Expres s your ans wer in terms o f the time -
indep endent w ave function ,
Combining Equa tion 7.23 and Equa tion 7.28 , Schrö ding er’s time -dep endent e qua tion re duces to
where Eis the total energ y of the p article (a re al numb er). This e qua tion is c alledSchrӧding er’s time -
indep endent e quat ion. Notice tha t we use “big psi ” for the time -dep endent w ave function and “lit tle psi ”
for the time -indep endent w ave function . The w ave-function solution to this e qua tion mus t be multiplie d
by the time -mo dula tion factor to obtain the time -dep endent w ave function .
In the ne xt sections , we solv e Schrӧding er’s time -indep endent e qua tion f or three c ases: a quantum p article in
a box, a simple harmonic oscilla tor, and a quantum b arrier . These c ases pro vide imp ortant les sons tha t can b e
used to solv e more c omplic ated systems . The time -indep endent w ave function solutions mus t satisfy
three c onditions:
• mus t be a c ontinuous function .
•The firs t deriv ative of with resp ect to sp ace, , mus t be continuous , unles s ∞.
• mus t not div erge (“blo w up ”) at ∞ℏ
ℏ7.26
7.27
7.28
ℏ7.29
ℏ7.307.3 • The Schrӧdinger Equation 313

The firs t condition a voids sudden jumps or g aps in the w ave function . The sec ond c ondition re quires the w ave
function to b e smo oth a t all p oints , except in sp ecial c ases . (In a more adv anced course on quantum
mechanics , for e xample , potential spik es o f infinite depth and height are use d to mo del solids). The third
condition re quires the w ave function b e normaliza ble. This third c ondition f ollows from Born ’s interpreta tion
of quantum mechanics . It ensures tha t is a finite numb er so w e can use it to c alcula te prob abilities .
CHE CK Y OUR UNDER STANDING 7.6
Which o f the f ollowing w ave functions is a v alid w ave-function solution f or Schrӧding er’s equa tion?
7.4The Quantum P article in a Bo x
Learning Objectiv es
By the end o f this section, y ou wil l be able t o:
•Describe ho w to se t up a boundar y-value pr oblem f or the s tationar y Schrӧ dinger equation
•Explain why the ener gy o f a quantum par ticle in a bo x is quantiz ed
•Describe the phy sical meaning o f stationar y solutions to Schrӧ dinger ’s equation and the connec tion o f these
solutions with time -dependent quantum s tates
•Explain the phy sical meaning o f Bohr ’s corr espondence principle
In this section , we apply Schrӧding er’s equa tion to a p article b ound to a one -dimensional b ox. This sp ecial
case pro vides les sons f or unders tanding quantum mechanics in more c omple x systems . The energ y of the
particle is quantiz ed as a c onse quenc e of a s tanding w ave condition inside the b ox.
Consider a p article o f mas s that is allo wed to mo ve only along the x-direction and its motion is c onfine d to
the region b etween hard and rigid w alls lo cated at and a t (Figure 7.10 ). Betw een the w alls, the
particle mo ves freely . This ph ysical situa tion is c alled the infinite square w ell, describ ed by the p otential
energ y function
Combining this e qua tion with Schrӧding er’s time -indep endent w ave equa tion giv es
where Eis the total energ y of the p article . Wha t typ es o f solutions do w e expect? The energ y of the p article is a
positiv e numb er, so if the v alue o f the w ave function is p ositiv e (right side o f the e qua tion), the cur vature o f the
wave function is neg ative, or c oncave do wn ( left side o f the e qua tion). Similarly , if the v alue o f the w ave
function is neg ative (right side o f the e qua tion), the cur vature o f the w ave function is p ositiv e or c oncave up
(left side o f equa tion). This c ondition is met b y an oscilla ting w ave function , such as a sine or c osine w ave.
Sinc e these w aves are c onfine d to the b ox, we en vision s tanding w aves with fix ed endp oints a t and
.∞7.31
ℏ7.32314 7 • Quantum Mechanics
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Figur e7.10 The pot ential ener gy function that c onfines the par ticle in a one -dimensional bo x.
Solutions to this e qua tion ha ve a prob abilis tic interpreta tion . In p articular , the square represents
the prob ability density o f finding the p article a t a p articular lo cation x. This function mus t be integra ted to
determine the prob ability o f finding the p article in some inter val of space. We are theref ore lo oking f or a
normaliza ble solution tha t satisfies the f ollowing normaliza tion c ondition:
The w alls are rigid and imp enetra ble, which me ans tha t the p article is nev er found b eyond the w all.
Mathema tically, this me ans tha t the solution mus t vanish a t the w alls:
We expect oscilla ting solutions , so the mos t general solution to this e qua tion is
where kis the w ave numb er, and and are c onstants . Applying the b oundar y condition e xpres sed by
Equa tion 7.34 gives
Because w e ha ve , the solution mus t be
If is zero, for all v alues o fxand the normaliza tion c ondition ,Equa tion 7.33 , cannot b e sa tisfied.
Assuming ,Equa tion 7.34 for then giv es
We disc ard the solution b ecause for this quantum numb er w ould b e zero ev erywhere —an un-
normaliza ble and theref ore unph ysical solution . Subs tituting Equa tion 7.37 into Equa tion 7.32 gives
Computing these deriv atives le ads to
According to de Broglie , ℏ so this e xpres sion implies tha t the total energ y is e qual to the kinetic energ y,
consis tent with our as sumption tha t the “p article mo ves freely .” Combining the results o fEqua tion 7.38 and
Equa tion 7.40 gives7.33
7.34
7.35
7.36
7.37
7.38
ℏ7.39
ℏ7.407.4 • The Quantum P article in a Bo x 315

Strang e! A p article b ound to a one -dimensional b ox can only ha ve certain discrete (quantiz ed) values o f
energ y. Further , the p article c annot ha ve a z ero kinetic energ y—it is imp ossible f or a p article b ound to a b ox to
be “at res t.”
To ev alua te the allo wed wave functions tha t corresp ond to these energies , we mus t find the normaliza tion
constant . We imp ose the normaliza tion c ondition Equa tion 7.33 on the w ave function
Henc e, the w ave functions tha t corresp ond to the energ y values giv en in Equa tion 7.41 are
For the lo west energ y state or ground s tate ener gy, we ha ve
All other energ y states c an b e expres sed as
The inde xnis called the ener gy quantum numb erorprincip al quantum numb er. The s tate for is the
first excited state, the s tate for is the sec ond e xcited state, and so on . The firs t three quantum s tates (f or
of a p article in a b ox are sho wn in Figure 7.11 .
The w ave functions in Equa tion 7.45 are sometimes ref erre d to as the “ states o f definite energ y.” Particles in
these s tates are said to o ccup yener gy levels, which are represente d by the horiz ontal lines in Figure 7.11 .
Energ y lev els are analog ous to r ungs o f a ladder tha t the p article c an “ climb ” as it g ains or loses energ y.
The w ave functions in Equa tion 7.45 are also c alledstationar y state sand standing w ave state s. These
functions are “ stationar y,” because their prob ability density functions , , do not v ary in time , and
“standing w aves” b ecause their re al and ima ginar y parts oscilla te up and do wn lik e a s tanding w ave—lik e a
rope waving b etween tw o children on a pla yground . Sta tionar y states are s tates o f definite energ y [Equa tion
7.45 ], but line ar combina tions o f these s tates, such as (also solutions to Schrӧding er’s
equa tion) are s tates o f mix ed energ y.ℏ7.41
7.42
7.43
ℏ
7.44
7.45316 7 • Quantum Mechanics
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Figur e7.11 The firs t thr ee quantum s tates o f a quantum par ticle in a bo x for principal quantum numbers : (a) s tanding
wave solutions and (b) al lowed ener gy states.
Energ y quantiza tion is a c onse quenc e of the b oundar y conditions . If the p article is not c onfine d to a b ox but
wanders freely , the allo wed energies are c ontinuous . Ho wever, in this c ase, only c ertain energies
…) are allo wed. The energ y diff erenc e between adjac ent energ y lev els is giv en b y
Conser vation o f energ y demands tha t if the energ y of the s ystem chang es, the energ y diff erenc e is c arrie d in
some other f orm o f energ y. For the sp ecial c ase o f a charg ed particle c onfine d to a small v olume (f or e xample ,
in an a tom), energ y chang es are o ften c arrie d away by photons . The fre quencies o f the emit ted photons giv e us
informa tion a bout the energ y diff erenc es (sp acings) o f the s ystem and the v olume o f containment —the siz e of
the “b ox” [see Equa tion 7.44 ].
EXAMPLE 7.8
A Simple Model o f the Nucleus
Supp ose a proton is c onfine d to a b ox of width (a typic al nucle ar radius). Wha t are the
energies o f the ground and the firs t excited states? If the proton mak es a transition from the firs t excited state
to the ground s tate, wha t are the energ y and the fre quency o f the emit ted photon?
Strategy
If we as sume tha t the proton c onfine d in the nucleus c an b e mo dele d as a quantum p article in a b ox, all w e
need to do is to use Equa tion 7.41 to find its energies and . The mas s of a proton is
The emit ted photon c arries a way the energ y diff erenc e We can use the
rela tion to find its fre quency f.
Solution
The ground s tate:
ℏ7.467.4 • The Quantum P article in a Bo x 317

The firs t excited state: .
The energ y of the emit ted photon is .
The fre quency o f the emit ted photon is
Significanc e
This is the typic al fre quency o f a g amma ra y emit ted by a nucleus . The energ y of this photon is a bout 10
million times gre ater than tha t of a visible light photon .
The e xpecta tion v alue o f the p osition f or a p article in a b ox is giv en b y
We can also find the e xpecta tion v alue o f the momentum or a verage momentum o f a larg e numb er o f particles
in a giv en s tate:
Thus , for a p article in a s tate of definite energ y, the a verage position is in the middle o f the b ox and the a verage
momentum o f the p article is z ero—as it w ould also b e for a clas sical particle . Note tha t while the minimum
energ y of a clas sical particle c an b e zero (the p article c an b e at res t in the middle o f the b ox), the minimum
energ y of a quantum p article is nonz ero and giv en b yEqua tion 7.44 . The a verage particle energ y in the nth
quantum s tate—its e xpecta tion v alue o f energ y—is
The result is not surprising b ecause the s tanding w ave state is a s tate of definite energ y. An y energ y
measurement o f this s ystem mus t return a v alue e qual to one o f these allo wed energies .
Our analy sis o f the quantum p article in a b ox would not b e complete without discus sing Bohr ’s
corresp ondenc e principle . This principle s tates tha t for larg e quantum numb ers, the la ws of quantum ph ysics
mus t giv e identic al results as the la ws of clas sical ph ysics . To illus trate ho w this principle w orks f or a quantum
particle in a b ox, we plot the prob ability density dis tribution
for finding the p article around lo cation xbetween the w alls when the p article is in quantum s tate .Figure
7.12 shows these prob ability dis tributions f or the ground s tate, for the firs t excited state, and f or a highly
excited state tha t corresp onds to a larg e quantum numb er. We see from these plots tha t when a quantum
particle is in the ground s tate, it is mos t lik ely to b e found around the middle o f the b ox, where the prob ability7.47
ℏ
ℏℏ
ℏ ℏ ℏ7.48
ℏ7.49
7.50318 7 • Quantum Mechanics
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

distribution has the larg est value . This is not so when the p article is in the firs t excited state because no w the
prob ability dis tribution has the z ero v alue in the middle o f the b ox, so there is no chanc e of finding the p article
there . When a quantum p article is in the firs t excited state, the prob ability dis tribution has tw o maxima, and
the b est chanc e of finding the p article is a t positions close to the lo cations o f these maxima. This quantum
picture is unlik e the clas sical picture .
Figur e7.12 The pr obability density dis tribution for a quantum par ticle in a bo x for: (a) the gr ound s tate, ; (b) the firs t
excited s tate, ; and, (c) the ninet eenth e xcited s tate, .
The prob ability density o f finding a clas sical particle b etween xand dep ends on ho w much time the
particle sp ends in this region . Assuming tha t its sp eeduis constant , this time is which is also
constant f or an y location b etween the w alls. Theref ore, the prob ability density o f finding the clas sical particle
atxis unif orm throughout the b ox, and there is no pref erable lo cation f or finding a clas sical particle . This
clas sical picture is ma tche d in the limit o f larg e quantum numb ers. For e xample , when a quantum p article is
in a highly e xcited state, sho wn in Figure 7.12 , the prob ability density is characteriz ed by rapid fluctua tions
and then the prob ability o f finding the quantum p article in the inter val does not dep end on where this
inter val is lo cated between the w alls.
EXAMPLE 7.9
A Clas sical P article in a Bo x
A small 0.40-k g cart is mo ving b ack and f orth along an air track b etween tw o bump ers lo cated 2.0 m ap art. We
assume no friction; c ollisions with the bump ers are p erfectly elas tic so tha t between the bump ers, the c ar
maintains a c onstant sp eed of 0.50 m/s . Treating the c art as a quantum p article , estima te the v alue o f the
princip al quantum numb er tha t corresp onds to its clas sical energ y.
Strategy
We find the kinetic energ yKof the c art and its ground s tate energ y as though it w ere a quantum p article .
The energ y of the c art is c ompletely kinetic , so (Equa tion 7.45 ). Solving f orngives .
Solution
The kinetic energ y of the c art is7.4 • The Quantum P article in a Bo x 319

The ground s tate of the c art, tre ated as a quantum p article , is
ℏ
Theref ore, .
Significanc e
We see from this e xample tha t the energ y of a clas sical system is characteriz ed by a v ery larg e quantum
numb er. Bohr ’scorresp ondenc e principle concerns this kind o f situa tion . We can apply the f ormalism o f
quantum mechanics to an y kind o f system , quantum or clas sical, and the results are c orrect in e ach c ase. In
the limit o f high quantum numb ers, there is no adv anta ge in using quantum f ormalism b ecause w e can obtain
the same results with the les s complic ated formalism o f clas sical mechanics . Ho wever, we cannot apply
clas sical formalism to a quantum s ystem in a lo w-numb er energ y state.
CHE CK Y OUR UNDER STANDING 7.7
(a) C onsider an infinite square w ell with w all b oundaries and . Wha t is the prob ability o f finding a
quantum p article in its ground s tate somewhere b etween and ? (b) R epeat ques tion (a) f or a
clas sical particle .
Having f ound the s tationar y states and the energies by solving the time -indep endent Schrӧding er
equa tion Equa tion 7.32 , we use Equa tion 7.28 to write w ave functions that are solutions o f the time -
dep endent Schrӧding er’s equa tion giv en b yEqua tion 7.23 . For a p article in a b ox this giv es
where the energies are giv en b yEqua tion 7.41 .
The quantum p article in a b ox mo del has practic al applic ations in a rela tively newly emerg ed field o f
opto electronics , which de als with devic es tha t convert electric al signals into optic al signals . This mo del also
deals with nanosc ale ph ysical phenomena, such as a nanop article trapp ed in a lo w electric p otential b ounde d
by high-p otential b arriers .
7.5The Quantum Harmonic Oscillator
Learning Objectiv es
By the end o f this section, y ou wil l be able t o:
•Describe the model o f the quantum harmonic oscillator
•Identif y dif ferences be tween the classical and quantum models o f the harmonic oscillator
•Explain phy sical situations wher e the classical and the quantum models coincide
Oscilla tions are f ound throughout na ture , in such things as electroma gnetic w aves, vibra ting molecules , and
the g entle b ack-and-f orth sway of a tree branch . In previous chapters , we use d Newtonian mechanics to s tudy
macrosc opic oscilla tions , such as a blo ck on a spring and a simple p endulum . In this chapter , we begin to s tudy
oscilla ting s ystems using quantum mechanics . We begin with a review o f the clas sic harmonic oscilla tor.
The Classic Harmonic Oscillator
A simple harmonic oscilla tor is a p article or s ystem tha t underg oes harmonic motion a bout an e quilibrium
position , such as an object with mas s vibra ting on a spring . In this section , we consider oscilla tions in one -
dimension only . Supp ose a mas s mo ves b ack-and-f orth along theℏ7.51320 7 • Quantum Mechanics
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

x-direction a bout the e quilibrium p osition , . In clas sical mechanics , the p article mo ves in resp onse to a
line ar res toring f orce giv en b y where xis the displac ement o f the p article from its e quilibrium
position . The motion tak es plac e between tw o turning p oints , , where Adenotes the amplitude o f the
motion . The p osition o f the object v aries p erio dically in time with angular fre quency which
dep ends on the mas smof the oscilla tor and on the f orce constant kof the net f orce, and c an b e writ ten as
The total energ yEof an oscilla tor is the sum o f its kinetic energ y and the elas tic p otential energ y of
the f orce
At turning p oints , the sp eed of the oscilla tor is z ero; theref ore, at these p oints , the energ y of oscilla tion
is solely in the f orm o f potential energ y . The plot o f the p otential energ yU(x) of the oscilla tor
versus its p osition xis a p arabola ( Figure 7.13 ). The p otential-energ y function is a quadra tic function o fx,
measure d with resp ect to the e quilibrium p osition . On the same graph , we also plot the total energ yEof the
oscilla tor, as a horiz ontal line tha t interc epts the p arabola a t . Then the kinetic energ yKis represente d
as the v ertical dis tanc e between the line o f total energ y and the p otential energ y parabola.
Figur e7.13 The pot ential ener gy well of a clas sical harmonic oscil lator: The motion is c onfined betw een turning points at and at
. The ener gy of oscil lations is
In this plot , the motion o f a clas sical oscilla tor is c onfine d to the region where its kinetic energ y is nonneg ative,
which is wha t the energ y rela tion Equa tion 7.53 says. Physically, it me ans tha t a clas sical oscilla tor c an nev er
be found b eyond its turning p oints , and its energ y dep ends only on ho w far the turning p oints are from its
equilibrium p osition . The energ y of a clas sical oscilla tor chang es in a c ontinuous w ay. The lo west energ y tha t a
clas sical oscilla tor ma y ha ve is z ero, which c orresp onds to a situa tion where an object is a t res t at its
equilibrium p osition . The z ero-energ y state of a clas sical oscilla tor simply me ans no oscilla tions and no
motion a t all (a clas sical particle sit ting a t the b ottom o f the p otential w ell in Figure 7.13 ). When an object
oscilla tes, no ma tter ho w big or small its energ y ma y be, it sp ends the long est time ne ar the turning p oints ,
because this is where it slo ws do wn and rev erses its direction o f motion . Theref ore, the prob ability o f finding a
clas sical oscilla tor b etween the turning p oints is highes t ne ar the turning p oints and lo west at the e quilibrium
position . (Note tha t this is not a s tatement o f pref erenc e of the object to g o to lo wer energ y. It is a s tatement
about ho w quickly the object mo ves through v arious regions .) 7.52
7.537.5 • The Quantum Harmonic Oscillator 321

The Quantum Harmonic Oscillator
One problem with this clas sical formula tion is tha t it is not g eneral . We cannot use it , for e xample , to describ e
vibra tions o f dia tomic molecules , where quantum eff ects are imp ortant . A firs t step to ward a quantum
formula tion is to use the clas sical expres sion to limit mention o f a “ spring ” constant b etween the
atoms . In this w ay the p otential energ y function c an b e writ ten in a more g eneral f orm ,
Combining this e xpres sion with the time -indep endent Schrӧding er e qua tion giv es
To solv eEqua tion 7.55 —tha t is, to find the allo wed energies Eand their c orresp onding w ave functions
—we re quire the w ave functions to b e symmetric a bout (the b ottom o f the p otential w ell) and to b e
normaliza ble. These c onditions ensure tha t the prob ability density mus t be finite when integra ted
over the entire rang e ofxfrom ∞to ∞. Ho w to solv eEqua tion 7.55 is the subject o f a more adv anced course
in quantum mechanics; here , we simply cite the results . The allo wed energies are
The w ave functions tha t corresp ond to these energies (the s tationar y states or s tates o f definite energ y) are
where ℏ, is the normaliza tion c onstant , and is a p olynomial o f degree ncalled a
Hermite p olynomial . The firs t four Hermite p olynomials are
A few sample w ave functions are giv en in Figure 7.14 . As the v alue o f the princip al numb er incre ases , the
solutions alterna te between ev en functions and o dd functions a bout . 7.54
ℏ
7.55
ℏ ℏ 7.56
7.57322 7 • Quantum Mechanics
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Figur e7.14 The firs t five wave functions o f the quantum harmonic oscil lator. The clas sical limits o f the oscil lator’s motion ar e indicat ed
by vertical lines , corresponding t o the clas sical turning points at of a clas sical par ticle with the same ener gy as the ener gy of a
quantum oscil lator in the s tate indicat ed in the fig ure.
EXAMPLE 7.10
Clas sical R egion o f Harmonic Oscil lations
Find the amplitude Aof oscilla tions f or a clas sical oscilla tor with energ y equal to the energ y of a quantum
oscilla tor in the quantum s taten.
Strategy
To determine the amplitude A, we set the clas sical energ y equal to given b y
Equa tion 7.56 .
Solution
We obtain

ℏℏ

Significanc e
As the quantum numb ernincre ases , the energ y of the oscilla tor and theref ore the amplitude o f oscilla tion
incre ases (f or a fix ed na tural angular fre quency . For larg en, the amplitude is appro xima tely prop ortional to
the square ro ot of the quantum numb er.
Several interes ting f eatures app ear in this solution . Unlik e a clas sical oscilla tor, the me asure d energies o f a
quantum oscilla tor c an ha ve only energ y values giv en b yEqua tion 7.56 . Moreo ver, unlik e the c ase f or a
quantum p article in a b ox, the allo wable energ y lev els are ev enly sp aced,
When a p article b ound to such a s ystem mak es a transition from a higher -energ y state to a lo wer-energ y state,
the smalles t-energ y quantum c arrie d by the emit ted photon is nec essarily hf. Similarly , when the p article
mak es a transition from a lo wer-energ y state to a higher -energ y state, the smalles t-energ y quantum tha t canℏ ℏ ℏ 7.587.5 • The Quantum Harmonic Oscillator 323

be absorb ed by the p article is hf. A quantum oscilla tor c an a bsorb or emit energ y only in multiples o f this
smalles t-energ y quantum . This is c onsis tent with Planck ’s hypothesis f or the energ y exchang es b etween
radia tion and the c avity w alls in the blackb ody radia tion problem .
EXAMPLE 7.11
Vibr ational Ener gies o f the Hy drogen Chloride Molecule
The HCl dia tomic molecule c onsis ts of one chlorine a tom and one h ydrog en a tom . Bec ause the chlorine a tom
is 35 times more mas sive than the h ydrog en a tom , the vibra tions o f the HCl molecule c an b e quite w ell
appro xima ted by as suming tha t the Cl a tom is motionles s and the H a tom p erforms harmonic oscilla tions due
to an elas tic molecular f orce mo dele d by Ho oke’s law. The infrare d vibra tional sp ectr um me asure d for
hydrog en chloride has the lo west-frequency line c entere d at . Wha t is the sp acing
between the vibra tional energies o f this molecule? Wha t is the f orce constant kof the a tomic b ond in the HCl
molecule?
Strategy
The lo west-frequency line c orresp onds to the emis sion o f lowest-frequency photons . These photons are
emit ted when the molecule mak es a transition b etween tw o adjac ent vibra tional energ y lev els. Assuming tha t
energ y lev els are e qually sp aced, we use Equa tion 7.58 to es tima te the sp acing . The molecule is w ell
appro xima ted by tre ating the Cl a tom as b eing infinitely he avy and the H a tom as the mas smthat performs the
oscilla tions . Treating this molecular s ystem as a clas sical oscilla tor, the f orce constant is f ound from the
clas sical rela tion .
Solution
The energ y sp acing is

The f orce constant is

Significanc e
The f orce between a toms in an HCl molecule is surprisingly s trong . The typic al energ y rele ased in energ y
transitions b etween vibra tional lev els is in the infrare d rang e. As w e will see la ter, transitions in b etween
vibra tional energ y lev els o f a dia tomic molecule o ften ac comp any transitions b etween rota tional energ y lev els.
CHE CK Y OUR UNDER STANDING 7.8
The vibra tional fre quency o f the h ydrog en io dide HI dia tomic molecule is . (a) Wha t is the
force constant o f the molecular b ond b etween the h ydrog en and the io dine a toms? ( b) Wha t is the energ y of the
emit ted photon when this molecule mak es a transition b etween adjac ent vibra tional energ y lev els?
The quantum oscilla tor diff ers from the clas sic oscilla tor in three w ays:
First, the ground s tate of a quantum oscilla tor is ℏ not z ero. In the clas sical view , the lo west energ y
is zero. The none xistenc e of a z ero-energ y state is c ommon f or all quantum-mechanic al systems b ecause o f
omnipresent fluctua tions tha t are a c onse quenc e of the Heisenb erg unc ertainty principle . If a quantum
particle sa t motionles s at the b ottom o f the p otential w ell, its momentum as w ell as its p osition w ould ha ve to
be simultaneously e xact , which w ould viola te the Heisenb erg unc ertainty principle . Theref ore, the lo west-
energ y state mus t be characteriz ed by unc ertainties in momentum and in p osition , so the ground s tate of a324 7 • Quantum Mechanics
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

quantum p article mus t lie a bove the b ottom o f the p otential w ell.
Second , a p article in a quantum harmonic oscilla tor p otential c an b e found with nonz ero prob ability outside
the inter val . In a clas sic f ormula tion o f the problem , the p article w ould not ha ve an y energ y to
be in this region . The prob ability o f finding a ground-s tate quantum p article in the clas sically f orbidden region
is about 16%.
Third , the prob ability density dis tributions for a quantum oscilla tor in the ground lo w-energ y state,
, is larg est at the middle o f the w ell . For the p article to b e found with gre atest prob ability a t the
center o f the w ell, we expect tha t the p article sp ends the mos t time there as it oscilla tes. This is opp osite to the
behavior o f a clas sical oscilla tor, in which the p article sp ends mos t of its time mo ving with rela tive small
speeds ne ar the turning p oints .
CHE CK Y OUR UNDER STANDING 7.9
Find the e xpecta tion v alue o f the p osition f or a p article in the ground s tate of a harmonic oscilla tor using
symmetr y.
Quantum prob ability density dis tributions chang e in character f or e xcited states, becoming more lik e the
clas sical dis tribution when the quantum numb er g ets higher . We obser ve this chang e alre ady f or the firs t
excited state of a quantum oscilla tor b ecause the dis tribution
peaks up around the turning p oints
and v anishes a t the e quilibrium p osition , as seen in Figure 7.13 . In ac cordanc e with Bohr ’s corresp ondenc e
principle , in the limit o f high quantum numb ers, the quantum description o f a harmonic oscilla tor c onverges
to the clas sical description , which is illus trated in Figure 7.15 . The clas sical prob ability density dis tribution
corresp onding to the quantum energ y of the state is a re asona bly g ood appro xima tion o f the quantum
prob ability dis tribution f or a quantum oscilla tor in this e xcited state. This a greement b ecomes incre asingly
better f or highly e xcited states.
Figur e7.15 The pr obability density dis tribution f or finding the quantum harmonic oscil lator in its quantum s tate. The dashed
curve sho ws the pr obability density dis tribution o f a clas sical oscil lator with the same ener gy.7.5 • The Quantum Harmonic Oscillator 325

7.6The Quantum T unneling o f Particles thr ough P otential
Barrier s
Learning Objectiv es
By the end o f this section, y ou wil l be able t o:
•Describe ho w a quantum par ticle may tunnel acr oss a po tential barrier
•Identif y impor tant phy sical par ame ters that af fect the tunneling pr obabilit y
•Identif y the phy sical phenomena wher e quantum tunneling is obser ved
•Explain ho w quantum tunneling is utiliz ed in modern technologies
Quantum tunneling is a phenomenon in which p articles p enetra te a p otential energ y barrier with a height
greater than the total energ y of the p articles . The phenomenon is interes ting and imp ortant b ecause it viola tes
the principles o f clas sical mechanics . Quantum tunneling is imp ortant in mo dels o f the Sun and has a wide
rang e of applic ations , such as the sc anning tunneling microsc ope and the tunnel dio de.
Tunneling and P otential Ener gy
To illus tratequantum tunneling , consider a b all rolling along a sur face with a kinetic energ y of 100 J . As the
ball rolls , it enc ounters a hill . The p otential energ y of the b all plac ed atop the hill is 10 J . Theref ore, the b all
(with 100 J o f kinetic energ y) easily rolls o ver the hill and c ontinues on . In clas sical mechanics , the prob ability
that the b all p asses o ver the hill is e xactly 1—it mak es it o ver ev ery time . If, ho wever, the height o f the hill is
incre ased—a b all plac ed atop the hill has a p otential energ y of 200 J—the b all pro ceeds only p art of the w ay up
the hill , stops , and returns in the direction it c ame . The total energ y of the b all is c onverted entirely into
potential energ y before it c an re ach the top o f the hill . We do not e xpect, even a fter rep eated attempts , for the
100- J ball to ev er b e found b eyond the hill . Theref ore, the prob ability tha t the b all p asses o ver the hill is e xactly
0, and prob ability it is turne d back or “reflecte d” by the hill is e xactly 1. The b allnevermak es it o ver the hill .
The e xistenc e of the b all b eyond the hill is an imp ossibility or “ energ etically f orbidden .”
However, according to quantum mechanics , the b all has a w ave function and this function is define d over all
space. The w ave function ma y be highly lo calized, but there is alw ays a chanc e tha t as the b all enc ounters the
hill, the b all will suddenly b e found b eyond it . Indee d, this prob ability is apprecia ble if the “ wave packet” of the
ball is wider than the b arrier .
INTER ACTIVE
View this interactiv e simula tion (https:/ /openstax.org/l/21intqua tanvid) for a simula tion o f tunneling .
In the langua ge of quantum mechanics , the hill is characteriz ed by apotent ial b arrier . A finite -height square
barrier is describ ed by the f ollowing p otential-energ y function:
The p otential b arrier is illus trated in Figure 7.16 . When the height of the b arrier is infinite , the w ave packet
representing an incident quantum p article is una ble to p enetra te it , and the quantum p article b ounc es b ack
from the b arrier b oundar y, jus t lik e a clas sical particle . When the width Lof the b arrier is infinite and its height
is finite , a p art of the w ave packet representing an incident quantum p article c an filter through the b arrier
boundar y and ev entually p erish a fter tra veling some dis tanc e inside the b arrier .7.59326 7 • Quantum Mechanics
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Figur e7.16 A pot ential ener gy barrier o f height creates thr ee ph ysical r egions with thr ee diff erent w ave beha viors . In r egion I wher e
, an incident w ave pack et (incident par ticle) mo ves in a pot ential -free z one and c oexists with a r eflect ed w ave pack et (r eflect ed
particle). In r egion II, a par t of the incident w ave that has not been r eflect ed at moves as a tr ansmit ted w ave in a c onstant pot ential
and tunnels thr ough t o region III at . In r egion III f or , a w ave pack et (tr ansmit ted par ticle) that has tunneled
through the pot ential barrier mo ves as a fr ee par ticle in pot ential -free z one. The ener gyEof the incident par ticle is indicat ed b y the
horiz ontal line .
When b oth the width Land the height are finite , a p art of the quantum w ave packet incident on one side o f
the b arrier c an p enetra te the b arrier b oundar y and c ontinue its motion inside the b arrier , where it is gradually
attenua ted on its w ay to the other side . A p art of the incident quantum w ave packet ev entually emerg es on the
other side o f the b arrier in the f orm o f the transmit ted wave packet tha t tunnele d through the b arrier . Ho w
much o f the incident w ave can tunnel through a b arrier dep ends on the b arrier width Land its height , and
on the energ yEof the quantum p article incident on the b arrier . This is the ph ysics o f tunneling .
Barrier p enetra tion b y quantum w ave functions w as firs t analyz ed theoretic ally b y Friedrich Hund in 1927,
shor tly a fter Schrӧding er publishe d the e qua tion tha t bears his name . A y ear la ter, Georg eGamo wused the
formalism o f quantum mechanics to e xplain the radio activ e-decay of atomic nuclei as a quantum-tunneling
phenomenon . The in vention o f the tunnel dio de in 1957 made it cle ar tha t quantum tunneling is imp ortant to
the semic onductor indus try. In mo dern nanotechnologies , individual a toms are manipula ted using a
kno wledge of quantum tunneling .
Tunneling and the W ave Function
Supp ose a unif orm and time -indep endent b eam o f electrons or other quantum p articles with energ yE
traveling along the x-axis (in the p ositiv e direction to the right) enc ounters a p otential b arrier describ ed by
Equa tion 7.59 . The ques tion is: Wha t is the prob ability tha t an individual p article in the b eam will tunnel
through the p otential b arrier? The ans wer can b e found b y solving the b oundar y-value problem f or the time -
indep endent Schrӧding er e qua tion f or a p article in the b eam. The g eneral f orm o f this e qua tion is giv en b y
Equa tion 7.60 , which w e repro duce here:
InEqua tion 7.60 , the p otential function U(x) is define d byEqua tion 7.59 . We as sume tha t the giv en energ yEof
the inc oming p article is smaller than the height of the p otential b arrier , , because this is the
interes ting ph ysical case. Knowing the energ yEof the inc oming p article , our task is to solv eEqua tion 7.60 for
a function that is c ontinuous and has c ontinuous firs t deriv atives for all x. In other w ords , we are lo oking
for a “ smo oth-lo oking ” solution ( because this is ho w w ave functions lo ok) tha t can b e giv en a prob abilis tic
interpreta tion so tha t is the prob ability density .ℏ
∞ ∞7.607.6 • The Quantum T unneling o f Particles thr ough P otential Barrier s 327

We divide the re al axis into three regions with the b oundaries define d by the p otential function in Equa tion
7.59 (illus trated in Figure 7.16 ) and transcrib eEqua tion 7.60 for e ach region . Denoting b y the solution in
region I f or , by the solution in region II f or , and b y the solution in region III f or
, the s tationar y Schrӧding er e qua tion has the f ollowing f orms in these three regions:
The c ontinuity c ondition a t region b oundaries re quires tha t:
and
The “ smo othnes s” condition re quires the firs t deriv ative of the solution b e continuous a t region b oundaries:
and
In wha t follows, we find the functions , , and .
We can e asily v erify (by subs tituting into the original e qua tion and diff erentia ting ) tha t in regions I and III, the
solutions mus t be in the f ollowing g eneral f orms:
where ℏis a w ave numb er and the c omple x exponent denotes oscilla tions ,
The c onstants A,B,F, and GinEqua tion 7.68 and Equa tion 7.69 may be comple x. These solutions are
illus trated in Figure 7.16 . In region I, there are tw o waves—one is incident (mo ving to the right) and one is
reflecte d (mo ving to the left)—so none o f the c onstants Aand BinEqua tion 7.68 may vanish . In region III, there
is only one w ave (mo ving to the right), which is the transmit ted wave, so the c onstant Gmus t be zero in
Equa tion 7.69 , . We can write e xplicitly tha t the incident w ave is and tha t the reflecte d
wave is , and tha t the transmit ted wave is . The amplitude o f the incident
wave is
Similarly , the amplitude o f the reflecte d wave is and the amplitude o f the transmit ted wave is
. We kno w from the theor y of waves tha t the square o f the w ave amplitude is directly
prop ortional to the w ave intensity . If w e want to kno w ho w much o f the incident w ave tunnels through the
barrier , we nee d to c ompute the square o f the amplitude o f the transmit ted wave. The transmis sion
prob abilit yortunneling prob abilit yis the ra tio o f the transmit ted intensity to the incident intensityℏ
∞7.61
ℏ7.62
ℏ
∞7.63
7.64
7.65
7.66
7.67
7.68
7.69
7.70328 7 • Quantum Mechanics
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

, writ ten as
where Lis the width o f the b arrier and Eis the total energ y of the p article . This is the prob ability an individual
particle in the incident b eam will tunnel through the p otential b arrier . Intuitiv ely, we unders tand tha t this
prob ability mus t dep end on the b arrier height .
In region II, the terms in e qua tion Equa tion 7.62 can b e re arrang ed to
where is positiv e because and the p arameter is a re al numb er,
The g eneral solution to Equa tion 7.72 is not oscilla tory (unlik e in the other regions) and is in the f orm o f
exponentials tha t describ e a gradual a ttenua tion o f ,
The tw o typ es o f solutions in the three regions are illus trated in Figure 7.17 .
Figur e7.17 Three types o f solutions t o the s tationar y Schrӧ ding er equation f or the quantum-tunneling pr oblem: Oscil latory beha vior in
regions I and III wher e a quantum par ticle mo ves fr eely, and e xponential -deca y beha vior in r egion II (the barrier r egion) wher e the par ticle
moves in the pot ential .
Now w e use the b oundar y conditions to find e qua tions f or the unkno wn c onstants .Equa tion 7.68 and Equa tion
7.74 are subs titute d into Equa tion 7.64 to giv e
Equa tion 7.74 and Equa tion 7.69 are subs titute d into Equa tion 7.65 to giv e
Similarly , we subs titute Equa tion 7.68 and Equa tion 7.74 into Equa tion 7.66 , diff erentia te, and obtain7.71
7.72
ℏ7.73
7.74
7.75
7.76
7.777.6 • The Quantum T unneling o f Particles thr ough P otential Barrier s 329

Similarly , the b oundar y condition Equa tion 7.67 reads e xplicitly
We no w ha ve four e qua tions f or fiv e unkno wn c onstants . Ho wever, because the quantity w e are a fter is the
transmis sion c oefficient , define d in Equa tion 7.71 by the fraction F/A, the numb er o f equa tions is e xactly right
because when w e divide e ach o f the a bove equa tions b yA, we end up ha ving only f our unkno wn fractions: B/A,
C/A,D/A, and F/A, three o f which c an b e elimina ted to find F/A. The actual alg ebra tha t leads to e xpres sion f or
F/Ais pret ty length y, but it c an b e done either b y hand or with a help o f computer so ftware. The end result is
In deriving Equa tion 7.79 , to a void the clut ter, we use the subs titutions ,
We subs titute Equa tion 7.79 into Equa tion 7.71 and obtain the e xact e xpres sion f or the transmis sion
coefficient f or the b arrier ,
or
where
For a wide and high b arrier tha t transmits p oorly ,Equa tion 7.80 can b e appro xima ted by
Whether it is the e xact e xpres sion Equa tion 7.80 or the appro xima te expres sion Equa tion 7.81 , we see tha t the
tunneling eff ect v ery strongly dep ends on the width Lof the p otential b arrier . In the la boratory, we can adjus t
both the p otential height and the width Lto design nano -devic es with desira ble transmis sion c oefficients .
EXAMPLE 7.12
Transmis sion Coef ficient
Two copp er nano wires are insula ted by a c opp er o xide nano -layer tha t pro vides a 10.0- eV potential b arrier .
Estima te the tunneling prob ability b etween the nano wires b y 7.00- eV electrons through a 5.00-nm thick o xide
layer. Wha t if the thicknes s of the la yer w ere re duced to jus t 1.00 nm? Wha t if the energ y of electrons w ere
incre ased to 9.00 e V?
Strategy
Treating the insula ting o xide la yer as a finite -height p otential b arrier , we use Equa tion 7.81 . We identif y
, , , , and . We use Equa tion 7.73 to
compute the e xponent . Also, we nee d the res t mas s of the electron and Planck ’s constant
ℏ . It is typic al for this typ e of estima te to de al with v ery small quantities tha t are o ften not7.78
7.79
7.80
7.81330 7 • Quantum Mechanics
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

suita ble f or handheld c alcula tors . To mak e correct es tima tes o f orders , we mak e the c onversion .
Solution
Constants:
ℏ
ℏ
For a lo wer-energ y electron with :
For a higher -energ y electron with :
For a bro ad b arrier with :
For a narro wer b arrier with :
Significanc e
We see from these es tima tes tha t the prob ability o f tunneling is a ffecte d more b y the width o f the p otential
barrier than b y the energ y of an incident p article . In to day’s technologies , we can manipula te individual a toms
on metal sur faces to cre ate p otential b arriers tha t are fractions o f a nanometer , giving rise to me asura ble
tunneling currents . One o f man y applic ations o f this technolog y is the sc anning tunneling microsc ope (STM),
which w e discus s later in this section .
CHE CK Y OUR UNDER STANDING 7.10
A proton with kinetic energ y 1.00 e V is incident on a square p otential b arrier with height 10.00 e V. If the
proton is to ha ve the same transmis sion prob ability as an electron o f the same energ y, wha t mus t the width o f
the b arrier b e rela tive to the b arrier width enc ountere d by an electron?
Radioac tive Decay
In 1928, G amo w identifie d quantum tunneling as the mechanism resp onsible f or the radio activ e dec ayof
atomic nuclei . He obser ved tha t some isotop es o f thorium , uranium , and bismuth disintegra te by emit ting
-particles ( which are doubly ioniz ed helium a toms or , simply sp eaking , helium nuclei). In the pro cess of
emit ting an -particle , the original nucleus is trans forme d into a new nucleus tha t has tw o fewer neutrons and
two fewer protons than the original nucleus . The -particles emit ted by one isotop e ha ve appro xima tely the7.6 • The Quantum T unneling o f Particles thr ough P otential Barrier s 331

same kinetic energies . When w e look a t varia tions o f these energies among isotop es o f various elements , the
lowest kinetic energ y is a bout 4 Me V and the highes t is a bout 9 Me V, so these energies are o f the same order o f
magnitude . This is a bout where the similarities b etween v arious isotop es end .
When w e insp ect half -lives (a half -life is the time in which a radio activ e sample loses half o f its nuclei due to
decay), diff erent isotop es diff er widely . For e xample , the half -life of polonium-214 is and the half -life of
uranium is 4.5 billion y ears. Gamo w explaine d this v aria tion b y considering a ‘ spheric al-b ox’ mo del o f the
nucleus , where -particles c an b ounc e back and f orth b etween the w alls as free p articles . The c onfinement is
provide d by a s trong nucle ar p otential a t a spheric al w all o f the b ox. The thicknes s of this w all, however, is not
infinite but finite , so in principle , a nucle ar p article has a chanc e to esc ape this nucle ar confinement . On the
inside w all o f the c onfining b arrier is a high nucle ar p otential tha t keeps the -particle in a small c onfinement .
But when an -particle g ets out to the other side o f this w all, it is subject to electros tatic C oulomb repulsion
and mo ves a way from the nucleus . This ide a is illus trated in Figure 7.18 . The width Lof the p otential b arrier
that sep arates an -particle from the outside w orld dep ends on the p article ’s kinetic energ yE. This width is the
distanc e between the p oint mark ed by the nucle ar radius Rand the p oint where an -particle emerg es on
the other side o f the b arrier , . At the dis tanc e , its kinetic energ y mus t at least ma tch the
electros tatic energ y of repulsion , (where is the charg e of the nucleus). In this w ay
we can es tima te the width o f the nucle ar b arrier ,
We see from this es tima te tha t the higher the energ y of-particle , the narro wer the width o f the b arrier tha t it
is to tunnel through . We also kno w tha t the width o f the p otential b arrier is the mos t imp ortant p arameter in
tunneling prob ability . Thus , highly energ etic -particles ha ve a g ood chanc e to esc ape the nucleus , and , for
such nuclei , the nucle ar disintegra tion half -life is shor t. Notice tha t this pro cess is highly nonline ar, me aning a
small incre ase in the -particle energ y has a disprop ortiona tely larg e enhancing eff ect on the tunneling
prob ability and , conse quently , on shor tening the half -life. This e xplains wh y the half -life of polonium tha t
emits 8-Me V-particles is only hundre ds o f millisec onds and the half -life of uranium tha t emits 4-Me V
-particles is billions o f years.332 7 • Quantum Mechanics
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Figur e7.18 The pot ential ener gy barrier f or an -par ticle bound in the nucleus: T o escape fr om the nucleus , an -par ticle with ener gyE
mus t tunnel acr oss the barrier fr om dis tanc eRto dis tanc e away from the c enter.
Field Emission
Field emis sion is a pro cess of emit ting electrons from c onducting sur faces due to a s trong e xternal electric
field tha t is applie d in the direction normal to the sur face (Figure 7.19 ). As w e kno w from our s tudy o f electric
fields in e arlier chapters , an applie d external electric field c auses the electrons in a c onductor to mo ve to its
surface and s tay there as long as the present e xternal field is not e xcessively s trong . In this situa tion , we ha ve a
constant electric p otential throughout the inside o f the c onductor , including its sur face. In the langua ge of
potential energ y, we sa y tha t an electron inside the c onductor has a c onstant p otential energ y
(here , the xmeans inside the c onductor). In the situa tion represente d in Figure 7.19 , where the e xternal
electric field is unif orm and has ma gnitude , if an electron happ ens to b e outside the c onductor a t a dis tanc e
xaway from its sur face, its p otential energ y would ha ve to b e (here ,xdenotes dis tanc e to the
surface). T aking the origin a t the sur face, so tha t is the lo cation o f the sur face, we can represent the
potential energ y of conduction electrons in a metal as the p otential energ y barrier sho wn in Figure 7.20 . In the
absenc e of the e xternal field , the p otential energ y becomes a s tep b arrier define d by and b y
.7.6 • The Quantum T unneling o f Particles thr ough P otential Barrier s 333

Figur e7.19 A normal -direction e xternal electric field at the sur face of a c onduct or: In a s trong field, the electr ons on a c onducting sur face
may get detached fr om it and ac celerate ag ains t the e xternal electric field a way from the sur face.
Figur e7.20 The pot ential ener gy barrier at the sur face of a metal lic conduct or in the pr esenc e of an e xternal unif orm electric field
normal t o the sur face: It bec omes a s tep-function barrier when the e xternal field is r emo ved. The w ork function o f the metal is indicat ed b y
When an e xternal electric field is s trong , conduction electrons a t the sur face ma y get detache d from it and
accelera te along electric field lines in a direction antip arallel to the e xternal field , away from the sur face. In
shor t, conduction electrons ma y esc ape from the sur face. The field emis sion can b e unders tood as the
quantum tunneling o f conduction electrons through the p otential b arrier a t the c onductor ’s sur face. The
physical principle a t work here is v ery similar to the mechanism o f-emis sion from a radio activ e nucleus .
Supp ose a c onduction electron has a kinetic energ yE(the a verage kinetic energ y of an electron in a metal is
the w ork function for the metal and c an b e me asure d, as discus sed for the photo electric eff ect in Photons
and Ma tter W aves), and an e xternal electric field c an b e locally appro xima ted by a unif orm electric field o f334 7 • Quantum Mechanics
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

strength . The width Lof the p otential b arrier tha t the electron mus t cros s is the dis tanc e from the
conductor ’s sur face to the p oint outside the sur face where its kinetic energ y ma tches the v alue o f its p otential
energ y in the e xternal field . InFigure 7.20 , this dis tanc e is me asure d along the dashe d horiz ontal line
from to the interc ept with , so the b arrier width is
We see tha tLis in versely prop ortional to the s trength of an e xternal field . When w e incre ase the s trength o f
the e xternal field , the p otential b arrier outside the c onductor b ecomes s teep er and its width decre ases f or an
electron with a giv en kinetic energ y. In turn , the prob ability tha t an electron will tunnel acros s the b arrier
(conductor sur face) becomes e xponentially larg er. The electrons tha t emerg e on the other side o f this b arrier
form a current (tunneling-electron current) tha t can b e detecte d above the sur face. The tunneling-electron
current is prop ortional to the tunneling prob ability . The tunneling prob ability dep ends nonline arly on the
barrier width L, and Lcan b e chang ed by adjus ting . Theref ore, the tunneling-electron current c an b e tune d
by adjus ting the s trength o f an e xternal electric field a t the sur face. When the s trength o f an e xternal electric
field is c onstant , the tunneling-electron current has diff erent v alues a t diff erent elev ations Labove the sur face.
The quantum tunneling phenomenon a t metallic sur faces, which w e ha ve jus t describ ed, is the ph ysical
principle b ehind the op eration o f the scanning tunneling microsc ope (S TM) , invente d in 1981 b y Gerd Binnig
and Heinrich R ohrer . The S TM devic e consis ts of a sc anning tip (a nee dle, usually made o f tungs ten, pla tinum-
iridium , or g old); a pie zoelectric devic e tha t controls the tip ’s elev ation in a typic al rang e of 0.4 to 0.7 nm a bove
the sur face to b e sc anne d; some devic e tha t controls the motion o f the tip along the sur face; and a c omputer to
displa y ima ges. While the sample is k ept a t a suita ble v olta ge bias , the sc anning tip mo ves along the sur face
(Figure 7.21 ), and the tunneling-electron current b etween the tip and the sur face is regis tere d at each p osition .
The amount o f the current dep ends on the prob ability o f electron tunneling from the sur face to the tip , which ,
in turn , dep ends on the elev ation o f the tip a bove the sur face. Henc e, at each tip p osition , the dis tanc e from the
tip to the sur face is me asure d by me asuring ho w man y electrons tunnel out from the sur face to the tip . This
metho d can giv e an unprec edente d resolution o f about 0.001 nm , which is a bout 1% o f the a verage diameter o f
an a tom . In this w ay, we can see individual a toms on the sur face, as in the ima ge of a c arbon nanotub e in
Figure 7.22 .
Figur e7.21 In S TM, a sur face at a c onstant pot ential is being scanned b y a narr ow tip mo ving along the sur face. When the S TM tip mo ves
close t o sur face atoms , electr ons can tunnel fr om the sur face to the tip . This tunneling-electr on curr ent is c ontinual ly monit ored while the
tip is in motion. The amount o f curr ent at location ( x,y) giv es inf ormation about the ele vation o f the tip abo ve the sur face at this location. In7.6 • The Quantum T unneling o f Particles thr ough P otential Barrier s 335

this w ay, a detailed t opogr aphical map o f the sur face is cr eated and displa yed on a c omput er monit or.
Figur e7.22 An S TM imag e of a carbon nanotube: A tomic-scale r esolution al lows us t o see individual at oms on the sur face. STM imag es
are in gr ay scale , and c oloring is added t o bring up details t o the human e ye. (credit: T aner Y ildirim, NIS T)
Resonant Quantum T unneling
Quantum tunneling has numerous applic ations in semic onductor devic es such as electronic circuit
comp onents or integra ted circuits tha t are designe d at nanosc ales; henc e, the term ‘ nanotechnolog y.’ For
example , a dio de (an electric -circuit element tha t causes an electron current in one direction to b e diff erent
from the current in the opp osite direction , when the p olarity o f the bias v olta ge is rev erse d) can b e re alized by
a tunneling junction b etween tw o diff erent typ es o f semic onducting ma terials . In such a tunnel dio de,
electrons tunnel through a single p otential b arrier a t a c ontact b etween tw o diff erent semic onductors . At the
junction , tunneling-electron current chang es nonline arly with the applie d potential diff erenc e acros s the
junction and ma y rapidly decre ase as the bias v olta ge is incre ased. This is unlik e the Ohm ’s law behavior tha t
we are familiar with in household circuits . This kind o f rapid b ehavior (c aused by quantum tunneling ) is
desira ble in high-sp eed electronic devic es.
Another kind o f electronic nano -devic e utiliz esresonant tunneling of electrons through p otential b arriers
that occur in quantum dots . Aquantum dot is a small region o f a semic onductor nano crystal tha t is gro wn, for
example , in a silic on or aluminum arsenide cr ystal.Figure 7.23 (a) sho ws a quantum dot o f gallium arsenide
emb edde d in an aluminum arsenide w afer. The quantum-dot region acts as a p otential w ell o f a finite height
(sho wn in Figure 7.23 (b)) tha t has tw o finite -height p otential b arriers a t dot b oundaries . Similarly , as f or a
quantum p article in a b ox (tha t is, an infinite p otential w ell), lo wer-lying energies o f a quantum p article
trapp ed in a finite -height p otential w ell are quantiz ed. The diff erenc e between the b ox and the w ell p otentials
is tha t a quantum p article in a b ox has an infinite numb er o f quantiz ed energies and is trapp ed in the b ox
indefinitely , where as a quantum p article trapp ed in a p otential w ell has a finite numb er o f quantiz ed energ y
levels and c an tunnel through p otential b arriers a t well b oundaries to the outside o f the w ell. Thus , a quantum
dot o f gallium arsenide sit ting in aluminum arsenide is a p otential w ell where lo w-lying energies o f an electron
are quantiz ed, indic ated as in p art (b) in the figure . When the energ y of an electron in the outside
region o f the dot do es not ma tch its energ y that it w ould ha ve in the dot , the electron do es not tunnel
through the region o f the dot and there is no current through such a circuit element , even if it w ere k ept a t an
electric v olta ge diff erenc e (bias). Ho wever, when this v olta ge bias is chang ed in such a w ay tha t one o f the
barriers is lo wered, so tha t and become aligne d, as seen in p art (c) o f the figure , an electron
current flo ws through the dot . When the v olta ge bias is no w incre ased, this alignment is los t and the current
stops flo wing . When the v olta ge bias is incre ased fur ther , the electron tunneling b ecomes improb able until the
bias v olta ge re aches a v alue f or which the outside electron energ y ma tches the ne xt electron energ y lev el in the
dot. The w ord ‘resonanc e’ in the devic e name me ans tha t the tunneling-electron current o ccurs only when a
selecte d energ y lev el is ma tche d by tuning an applie d volta ge bias , such as in the op eration mechanism o f the
resonant -tunneling dio dejust describ ed. Resonant -tunneling dio des are use d as sup er-fas t nano -switches .336 7 • Quantum Mechanics
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Figur e7.23 Resonant -tunneling diode: (a) A quantum dot o f gallium arsenide embedded in aluminum arsenide . (b) P otential w ell
consis ting o f two pot ential barriers o f a quantum dot with no v oltage bias . Electr on ener gies in aluminum arsenide ar e not aligned
with their ener gy levels in the quantum dot, so electr ons do not tunnel thr ough the dot. (c) P otential w ell of the dot with a v oltage bias
across the de vice. A suitabl y tuned v oltage diff erence dis torts the w ell so that electr on-ener gy levels in the dot ar e aligned with their
ener gies in aluminum arsenide , causing the electr ons t o tunnel thr ough the dot.7.6 • The Quantum T unneling o f Particles thr ough P otential Barrier s 337

CHAP TER RE VIEW
Key Terms
anti-symmetric funct ion odd function
Born interpretat ion states tha t the square o f a
wave function is the prob ability density
comple x funct ion function c ontaining b oth re al
and ima ginar y parts
Copenha gen interpretat ion states tha t when an
obser veris not looking or when a me asurement is
not b eing made , the p article has man y values o f
measura ble quantities , such as p osition
corresp ondenc e principle in the limit o f larg e
energies , the pre dictions o f quantum mechanics
agree with the pre dictions o f clas sical mechanics
ener gy levels states o f definite energ y, often
represente d by horiz ontal lines in an energ y
“ladder ” dia gram
ener gy quantum numb er inde x tha t labels the
allowed energ y states
ener gy-time unc ertaint y principle energ y-time
rela tion f or unc ertainties in the simultaneous
measurements o f the energ y of a quantum s tate
and o f its lif etime
even funct ion in one dimension , a function
symmetric with the origin o f the c oordina te
system
expectat ion v alue average value o f the ph ysical
quantity as suming a larg e numb er o f particles
with the same w ave function
field emis sion electron emis sion from c onductor
surfaces when a s trong e xternal electric field is
applie d in normal direction to c onductor ’s
surface
ground s tate ener gylowest energ y state in the
energ y sp ectr um
Heisenb erg’s unc ertaint y principle plac es limits
on wha t can b e kno wn from a simultaneous
measurements o f position and momentum; s tates
that if the unc ertainty on p osition is small then
the unc ertainty on momentum is larg e, and vic e
versa
infinite square w ell potential function tha t is z ero
in a fix ed rang e and infinitely b eyond this rang e
momentum op erator operator tha t corresp onds to
the momentum o f a p article
nanotechnolog ytechnolog y tha t is b ased on
manipula tion o f nanos tructures such as
molecules or individual a toms to pro duce nano -
devic es such as integra ted circuits
normalizat ion c ondit ion requires tha t the
prob ability density integra ted over the entire
physical sp ace results in the numb er oneodd funct ion in one dimension , a function
antis ymmetric with the origin o f the c oordina te
system
posit ion op erator operator tha t corresp onds to the
position o f a p article
potent ial b arrier potential function tha t rises and
falls with incre asing v alues o f position
princip al quantum numb er energ y quantum
numb er
prob abilit y densit ysquare o f the p article ’s wave
function
quantum dot small region o f a semic onductor
nano crystal emb edde d in another semic onductor
nano crystal, acting as a p otential w ell for
electrons
quantum tunneling phenomenon where p articles
penetra te through a p otential energ y barrier with
a height gre ater than the total energ y of the
particles
resonant tunneling tunneling o f electrons through
a finite -height p otential w ell tha t occurs only
when electron energies ma tch an energ y lev el in
the w ell, occurs in quantum dots
resonant -tunneling dio de quantum dot with an
applie d volta ge bias acros s it
scanning tunneling microsc ope (S TM) devic e tha t
utiliz es quantum-tunneling phenomenon a t
metallic sur faces to obtain ima ges o f nanosc ale
structures
Schrӧding er’s time -dep endent e quat ion equa tion
in sp ace and time tha t allo ws us to determine
wave functions o f a quantum p article
Schrӧding er’s time -indep endent e quat ion
equa tion in sp ace tha t allo ws us to determine
wave functions o f a quantum p article; this w ave
function mus t be multiplie d by a time -
modula tion factor to obtain the time -dep endent
wave function
standing w ave state stationar y state for which the
real and ima ginar y parts of oscilla te up
and do wn lik e a s tanding w ave (often mo dele d
with sine and c osine functions)
state re duct ion hypothetic al pro cess in which an
obser ved or detecte d particle “jumps into ” a
definite s tate, often describ ed in terms o f the
collapse o f the p article ’s wave function
stationar y state state for which the prob ability
density function , , does not v ary in time
time -mo dulat ion f actor factor that
multiplies the time -indep endent w ave function338 7 • Chap ter Re view
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

when the p otential energ y of the p article is time
indep endent
transmis sion prob abilit yalso c alled tunneling
prob ability , the prob ability tha t a p article will
tunnel through a p otential b arrier
tunnel dio de electron tunneling-junction b etween
two diff erent semic onductors
tunneling prob abilit yalso c alled transmis sion
prob ability , the prob ability tha t a p article willtunnel through a p otential b arrier
wave funct ion function tha t represents the
quantum s tate of a p article (quantum s ystem)
wave funct ion c ollapse equiv alent to s tate
reduction
wave packet superposition o f man y plane ma tter
waves tha t can b e use d to represent a lo calized
particle
Key Equations
Normaliza tion c ondition in one dimension ∞ ∞
∞∞
Probability o f finding a p article in a narro w inter val of
position in one dimension
Exp ecta tion v alue o f position in one dimension
∞∞
Heisenb erg’s position-momentum unc ertainty principleℏ
Heisenb erg’s energ y-time unc ertainty principleℏ
Schrӧding er’s time -dep endent e qua tionℏ
ℏ
General f orm o f the w ave function f or a time -indep endent
potential in one dimension
Schrӧding er’s time -indep endent e qua tionℏ
Schrӧding er’s equa tion (free p article)ℏ
Allowed energies (p article in b ox of length L)ℏ
Stationar y states (p article in a b ox of length L)7 • Chap ter Re view 339

Potential-energ y function o f a harmonic oscilla tor
Schrӧding er e qua tion ( harmonic oscilla tor)ℏ
The energ y sp ectr um ℏ
The energ y wave functions
Potential b arrier
Definition o f the transmis sion c oefficient
A parameter in the transmis sion c oefficientℏ
Transmis sion c oefficient , exact
Transmis sion c oefficient , appro xima te
Summar y
7.1Wave Functions
•In quantum mechanics , the s tate of a ph ysical
system is represente d by a w ave function .
•In Born ’s interpreta tion , the square o f the
particle ’s wave function represents the
prob ability density o f finding the p article
around a sp ecific lo cation in sp ace.
•Wave functions mus t firs t be normaliz ed before
using them to mak e pre dictions .
•The e xpecta tion v alue is the a verage value o f a
quantity tha t requires a w ave function and an
integra tion .
7.2The Heisenber g Uncer taint y Principle
•The Heisenb erg unc ertainty principle s tates tha t
it is imp ossible to simultaneously me asure the
x-comp onents o f position and o f momentum o f
a particle with an arbitrarily high precision . The
product o f experimental unc ertainties is alw ays
larg er than or e qual to ℏ
•The limita tions o f this principle ha ve nothing to
do with the quality o f the e xperimentalapp aratus but origina te in the w ave-like na ture
of ma tter.
•The energ y-time unc ertainty principle
expres ses the e xperimental obser vation tha t a
quantum s tate tha t exists only f or a shor t time
cannot ha ve a definite energ y.
7.3The Schrӧ dinger Equation
•The Schrӧding er e qua tion is the fundamental
equa tion o f wave quantum mechanics . It allo ws
us to mak e pre dictions a bout w ave functions .
•When a p article mo ves in a time -indep endent
potential , a solution o f the time -dep endent
Schrӧding er e qua tion is a pro duct o f a time -
indep endent w ave function and a time -
modula tion factor .
•The Schrӧding er e qua tion c an b e applie d to
man y ph ysical situa tions .
7.4The Quantum P article in a Bo x
•Energ y states o f a quantum p article in a b ox are
found b y solving the time -indep endent
Schrӧding er e qua tion .340 7 • Chap ter Re view
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

•To solv e the time -indep endent Schrӧding er
equa tion f or a p article in a b ox and find the
stationar y states and allo wed energies , we
require tha t the w ave function termina te at the
box wall.
•Energ y states o f a p article in a b ox are quantiz ed
and inde xed by princip al quantum numb er.
•The quantum picture diff ers signific antly from
the clas sical picture when a p article is in a lo w-
energ y state of a lo w quantum numb er.
•In the limit o f high quantum numb ers, when the
quantum p article is in a highly e xcited state, the
quantum description o f a p article in a b ox
coincides with the clas sical description , in the
spirit o f Bohr ’s corresp ondenc e principle .
7.5The Quantum Harmonic Oscillator
•The quantum harmonic oscilla tor is a mo del
built in analog y with the mo del o f a clas sical
harmonic oscilla tor. It mo dels the b ehavior o f
man y ph ysical systems , such as molecular
vibra tions or w ave packets in quantum optics .
•The allo wed energies o f a quantum oscilla tor are
discrete and ev enly sp aced. The energ y sp acing
is equal to Planck ’s energ y quantum .
•The ground s tate energ y is larg er than z ero. This
means tha t, unlik e a clas sical oscilla tor, a
quantum oscilla tor is nev er a t res t, even a t the
bottom o f a p otential w ell, and underg oes
quantum fluctua tions .
•The s tationar y states (s tates o f definite energ y)
have nonz ero v alues also in regions b eyond
clas sical turning p oints . When in the ground
state, a quantum oscilla tor is mos t lik ely to b e
found around the p osition o f the minimum o f
the p otential w ell, which is the le ast-likelyposition f or a clas sical oscilla tor.
•For high quantum numb ers, the motion o f a
quantum oscilla tor b ecomes more similar to the
motion o f a clas sical oscilla tor, in ac cordanc e
with Bohr ’s corresp ondenc e principle .
7.6The Quantum T unneling o f Particles
through P otential Barrier s
•A quantum p article tha t is incident on a
potential b arrier o f a finite width and height
may cros s the b arrier and app ear on its other
side . This phenomenon is c alled ‘quantum
tunneling .’ It do es not ha ve a clas sical analog .
•To find the prob ability o f quantum tunneling , we
assume the energ y of an incident p article and
solv e the s tationar y Schrӧding er e qua tion to
find w ave functions inside and outside the
barrier . The tunneling prob ability is a ra tio o f
square d amplitudes o f the w ave past the b arrier
to the incident w ave.
•The tunneling prob ability dep ends on the
energ y of the incident p article rela tive to the
height o f the b arrier and on the width o f the
barrier . It is s trongly a ffecte d by the width o f the
barrier in a nonline ar, exponential w ay so tha t a
small chang e in the b arrier width c auses a
disprop ortiona tely larg e chang e in the
transmis sion prob ability .
•Quantum-tunneling phenomena g overn
radio activ e nucle ar dec ays. The y are utiliz ed in
man y mo dern technologies such as S TM and
nano -electronics . STM allo ws us to see
individual a toms on metal sur faces. Electron-
tunneling devic es ha ve rev olutioniz ed
electronics and allo w us to build fas t electronic
devic es o f minia ture siz es.
Concep tual Ques tions
7.1Wave Functions
1.Wha t is the ph ysical unit o f a w ave function ,
Wha t is the ph ysical unit o f the square o f
this w ave function?
2.Can the ma gnitude o f a w ave function
be a neg ative numb er? Explain .
3.Wha t kind o f ph ysical quantity do es a w ave
function o f an electron represent?
4.Wha t is the ph ysical me aning o f a w ave function
of a p article?
5.Wha t is the me aning o f the e xpres sion
“expecta tion v alue? ” Explain .7.2The Heisenber g Uncer taint y Principle
6.If the f ormalism o f quantum mechanics is ‘more
exact ’ than tha t of clas sical mechanics , wh y don ’t
we use quantum mechanics to describ e the
motion o f a le aping frog? Explain .
7.Can the de Broglie w avelength o f a p article b e
kno wn precisely? C an the p osition o f a p article b e
kno wn precisely?
8.Can w e me asure the energ y of a free lo calized
particle with c omplete precision?
9.Can w e me asure b oth the p osition and
momentum o f a p article with c omplete
precision?7 • Chap ter Re view 341

7.3The Schrӧ dinger Equation
10.Wha t is the diff erenc e between a w ave function
and a w ave function for
the same p article?
11.If a quantum p article is in a s tationar y state,
does it me an tha t it do es not mo ve?
12.Explain the diff erenc e between time -dep endent
and -indep endent Schrӧding er’s equa tions .
13.Supp ose a w ave function is disc ontinuous a t
some p oint . Can this function represent a
quantum s tate of some ph ysical particle? Wh y?
Why not?
7.4The Quantum P article in a Bo x
14.Using the quantum p article in a b ox mo del,
describ e ho w the p ossible energies o f the
particle are rela ted to the siz e of the b ox.
15.Is it p ossible tha t when w e me asure the energ y
of a quantum p article in a b ox, the
measurement ma y return a smaller v alue than
the ground s tate energ y? Wha t is the highes t
value o f the energ y tha t we can me asure f or this
particle?
16.For a quantum p article in a b ox, the firs t excited
state has z ero v alue a t the midp oint
position in the b ox, so tha t the prob ability
density o f finding a p article a t this p oint is
exactly z ero. Explain wha t is wrong with the
following re asoning: “If the prob ability o f
finding a quantum p article a t the midp oint is
zero, the p article is nev er a t this p oint , right?
How do es it c ome then tha t the p article c an
cros s this p oint on its w ay from the left side to
the right side o f the b ox?7.5The Quantum Harmonic Oscillator
17.Is it p ossible to me asure energ y of ℏ for a
quantum harmonic oscilla tor? Wh y? Wh y not?
Explain .
18.Explain the c onnection b etween Planck ’s
hypothesis o f energ y quanta and the energies o f
the quantum harmonic oscilla tor.
19.If a clas sical harmonic oscilla tor c an b e at res t,
why can the quantum harmonic oscilla tor nev er
be at res t? Do es this viola te Bohr ’s
corresp ondenc e principle?
20.Use an e xample o f a quantum p article in a b ox
or a quantum oscilla tor to e xplain the ph ysical
meaning o f Bohr ’s corresp ondenc e principle .
21.Can w e simultaneously me asure p osition and
energ y of a quantum oscilla tor? Wh y? Wh y not?
7.6The Quantum T unneling o f Particles
through P otential Barrier s
22.When an electron and a proton o f the same
kinetic energ y enc ounter a p otential b arrier o f
the same height and width , which one o f them
will tunnel through the b arrier more e asily?
Why?
23.Wha t decre ases the tunneling prob ability mos t:
doubling the b arrier width or halving the kinetic
energ y of the incident p article?
24.Explain the diff erenc e between a b ox-potential
and a p otential o f a quantum dot .
25.Can a quantum p article ‘ escape’ from an infinite
potential w ell lik e tha t in a b ox? Wh y? Wh y not?
26.A tunnel dio de and a resonant -tunneling dio de
both utiliz e the same ph ysics principle o f
quantum tunneling . In wha t imp ortant w ay are
they diff erent?
Problems
7.1Wave Functions
27.Compute for the function
, where is a re al
constant .
28.Given the c omple x-value d function
, calcula te
.
29.Which one o f the f ollowing functions , and wh y,
qualifies to b e a w ave function o f a p article tha t
can mo ve along the entire re al axis? (a)
;
(b) ; (c) ;
(d) ; (e) .
30.A particle with mas smmoving along the x-axis
and its quantum s tate is represente d by the
following w ave function:
ℏ
where . (a) F ind the
normaliza tion c onstant . (b) F ind the prob ability
that the p article c an b e found on the inter val
. (c) F ind the e xpecta tion v alue o f342 7 • Chap ter Re view
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

position . (d) F ind the e xpecta tion v alue o f
kinetic energ y.
31.A wave function o f a p article with mas smis
given b y
where . (a) F ind the
normaliza tion c onstant . (b) F ind the prob ability
that the p article c an b e found on the inter val
. (c) F ind the p article ’s
average position . (d) F ind its a verage
momentum . (e) F ind its a verage kinetic energ y
.
7.2The Heisenber g Uncer taint y Principle
32.A velocity me asurement o f an -particle has
been p erforme d with a precision o f 0.02 mm/s .
Wha t is the minimum unc ertainty in its
position?
33.A gas o f helium a toms a t 273 K is in a cubic al
container with 25.0 cm on a side . (a) Wha t is the
minimum unc ertainty in momentum
comp onents o f helium a toms? ( b) Wha t is the
minimum unc ertainty in v elocity c omp onents?
(c) F ind the ra tio o f the unc ertainties in ( b) to
the me an sp eed of an a tom in e ach direction .
34.If the unc ertainty in the -comp onent o f a
proton ’s position is 2.0 pm , find the minimum
unc ertainty in the simultaneous me asurement
of the proton ’s-comp onent o f velocity. Wha t is
the minimum unc ertainty in the simultaneous
measurement o f the proton ’s-comp onent o f
velocity?
35.Some uns table elementar y particle has a res t
energ y of 80.41 Ge V and an unc ertainty in res t
energ y of 2.06 Ge V. Estima te the lif etime o f this
particle .
36.An a tom in a metas table s tate has a lif etime o f
5.2 ms . Find the minimum unc ertainty in the
measurement o f energ y of the e xcited state.
37.Measurements indic ate tha t an a tom remains in
an e xcited state for an a verage time o f 50.0 ns
before making a transition to the ground s tate
with the simultaneous emis sion o f a 2.1- eV
photon . (a) Es tima te the unc ertainty in the
frequency o f the photon . (b) Wha t fraction o f the
photon ’s average fre quency is this?
38.Supp ose an electron is c onfine d to a region o f
length 0.1 nm (o f the order o f the siz e of a
hydrog en a tom). (a) Wha t is the minimum
unc ertainty o f its momentum? ( b) Wha t would
the unc ertainty in momentum b e if the c onfine dlength region double d to 0.2 nm?
7.3The Schrӧ dinger Equation
39.Combine Equa tion 7.17 and Equa tion 7.18 to
show
40.Sho w tha t is a v alid
solution to Schrӧding er’s time -dep endent
equa tion .
41.Sho w tha t and
do not ob ey
Schrӧding er’s time -dep endent e qua tion .
42.Sho w tha t when and are
solutions to the time -dep endent Schrӧding er
equa tion and A,Bare numb ers, then a function
that is a sup erposition o f these functions
is also a solution:
.
43.A particle with mas smis describ ed by the
following w ave function:
, where A,B, and k
are c onstants . Assuming tha t the p article is free ,
show tha t this function is the solution o f the
stationar y Schrӧding er e qua tion f or this
particle and find the energ y tha t the p article has
in this s tate.
44.Find the e xpecta tion v alue o f the kinetic energ y
for the p article in the s tate,
. Wha t conclusion c an y ou
draw from y our solution?
45.Find the e xpecta tion v alue o f the square o f the
momentum square d for the p article in the s tate,
. Wha t conclusion c an y ou
draw from y our solution?
46.A free proton has a w ave function giv en b y
.
The c oefficient o fxis in verse meters and
the c oefficient on tis in verse sec onds
Find its momentum and energ y.
7.4The Quantum P article in a Bo x
47.Assume tha t an electron in an a tom c an b e
treated as if it w ere c onfine d to a b ox of width
. Wha t is the ground s tate energ y of the
electron? C omp are y our result to the ground
state kinetic energ y of the h ydrog en a tom in the
Bohr ’s mo del o f the h ydrog en a tom .
48.Assume tha t a proton in a nucleus c an b e
treated as if it w ere c onfine d to a one -
dimensional b ox of width 10.0 fm . (a) Wha t are
the energies o f the proton when it is in the
states c orresp onding to , , and ?7 • Chap ter Re view 343

(b) Wha t are the energies o f the photons emit ted
when the proton mak es the transitions from the
first and sec ond e xcited states to the ground
state?
49.An electron c onfine d to a b ox has the ground
state energ y of 2.5 e V. Wha t is the width o f the
box?
50.Wha t is the ground s tate energ y (in e V) of a
proton c onfine d to a one -dimensional b ox the
size of the uranium nucleus tha t has a radius o f
appro xima tely 15.0 fm?
51.Wha t is the ground s tate energ y (in e V) of an
-particle c onfine d to a one -dimensional b ox
the siz e of the uranium nucleus tha t has a
radius o f appro xima tely 15.0 fm?
52.To excite an electron in a one -dimensional b ox
from its firs t excited state to its third e xcited
state re quires 20.0 e V. Wha t is the width o f the
box?
53.An electron c onfine d to a b ox of width 0.15 nm
by infinite p otential energ y barriers emits a
photon when it mak es a transition from the firs t
excited state to the ground s tate. Find the
wavelength o f the emit ted photon .
54.If the energ y of the firs t excited state of the
electron in the b ox is 25.0 e V, wha t is the width
of the b ox?
55.Supp ose an electron c onfine d to a b ox emits
photons . The long est wavelength tha t is
regis tere d is 500.0 nm . Wha t is the width o f the
box?
56.Hydrog en molecules are k ept a t 300.0 K in a
cubic al container with a side length o f 20.0 cm .
Assume tha t you c an tre at the molecules as
though the y were mo ving in a one -dimensional
box. (a) F ind the ground s tate energ y of the
hydrog en molecule in the c ontainer . (b) As sume
that the molecule has a thermal energ y giv en b y
and find the c orresp onding quantum
numb ernof the quantum s tate tha t would
corresp ond to this thermal energ y.
57.An electron is c onfine d to a b ox of width 0.25
nm. (a) Dra w an energ y-lev el dia gram
representing the firs t fiv e states o f the electron .
(b) C alcula te the w avelengths o f the emit ted
photons when the electron mak es transitions
between the f ourth and the sec ond e xcited
states, between the sec ond e xcited state and the
ground s tate, and b etween the third and the
second e xcited states.
58.An electron in a b ox is in the ground s tate with
energ y 2.0 e V. (a) F ind the width o f the b ox. (b)
How much energ y is nee ded to e xcite theelectron to its firs t excited state? (c) If the
electron mak es a transition from an e xcited
state to the ground s tate with the simultaneous
emis sion o f 30.0- eV photon , find the quantum
numb er o f the e xcited state?
7.5The Quantum Harmonic Oscillator
59.Sho w tha t the tw o lowest energ y states o f the
simple harmonic oscilla tor, and
from Equa tion 7.57 , satisfyEqua tion 7.55 .
60.If the ground s tate energ y of a simple harmonic
oscilla tor is 1.25 e V, wha t is the fre quency o f its
motion?
61.When a quantum harmonic oscilla tor mak es a
transition from the state to the nstate
and emits a 450-nm photon , wha t is its
frequency?
62.Vibra tions o f the h ydrog en molecule can b e
modele d as a simple harmonic oscilla tor with
the spring c onstant and
mas s . (a) Wha t is the
vibra tional fre quency o f this molecule? ( b) Wha t
are the energ y and the w avelength o f the
emit ted photon when the molecule mak es
transition b etween its third and sec ond e xcited
states?
63.A particle with mas s 0.030 k g oscilla tes b ack-
and-f orth on a spring with fre quency 4.0 Hz. A t
the e quilibrium p osition , it has a sp eed of 0.60
m/s . If the p article is in a s tate of definite
energ y, find its energ y quantum numb er.
64.Find the e xpecta tion v alue of the
square o f the p osition f or a quantum harmonic
oscilla tor in the ground s tate. Note:
∞
∞
.
65.Determine the e xpecta tion v alue o f the p otential
energ y for a quantum harmonic oscilla tor in the
ground s tate. Use this to c alcula te the
expecta tion v alue o f the kinetic energ y.
66.Verify tha t given b yEqua tion 7.57 is a
solution o f Schrӧding er’s equa tion f or the
quantum harmonic oscilla tor.
67.Estima te the ground s tate energ y of the
quantum harmonic oscilla tor b y Heisenb erg’s
unc ertainty principle . Star t by as suming tha t
the pro duct o f the unc ertainties and is at
its minimum . Write in terms o f and
assume tha t for the ground s tate and
then write the ground s tate energ y in
terms o fx. Finally , find the v alue o fxthat344 7 • Chap ter Re view
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

minimiz es the energ y and find the minimum o f
the energ y.
68.A mas s of 0.250 k g oscilla tes on a spring with
the f orce constant 110 N /m. Calcula te the
ground energ y lev el and the sep aration b etween
the adjac ent energ y lev els. Expres s the results
in joules and in electron-v olts. Are quantum
effects imp ortant?
7.6The Quantum T unneling o f Particles
through P otential Barrier s
69.Sho w tha t the w ave function in (a) Equa tion 7.68
satisfies Equa tion 7.61 , and ( b)Equa tion 7.69
satisfies Equa tion 7.63 .
70.A 6.0- eV electron imp acts on a b arrier with
height 11.0 e V. Find the prob ability o f the
electron to tunnel through the b arrier if the
barrier width is (a) 0.80 nm and ( b) 0.40 nm .
71.A 5.0- eV electron imp acts on a b arrier o f with
0.60 nm . Find the prob ability o f the electron to
tunnel through the b arrier if the b arrier height
is (a) 7.0 e V; (b) 9.0 e V; and (c) 13.0 e V.
72.A 12.0- eV electron enc ounters a b arrier o f
height 15.0 e V. If the prob ability o f the electron
tunneling through the b arrier is 2.5 %, find its
width .
73.A quantum p article with initial kinetic energ y32.0 e V enc ounters a square b arrier with height
41.0 e V and width 0.25 nm . Find prob ability
that the p article tunnels through this b arrier if
the p article is (a) an electron and , (b) a proton .
74.A simple mo del o f a radio activ e nucle ar dec ay
assumes tha t-particles are trapp ed inside a
well o f nucle ar p otential tha t walls are the
barriers o f a finite width 2.0 fm and height 30.0
MeV. Find the tunneling prob ability acros s the
potential b arrier o f the w all for -particles
having kinetic energ y (a) 29.0 Me V and ( b) 20.0
MeV. The mas s of the -particle is
.
75.A muon , a quantum p article with a mas s
appro xima tely 200 times tha t of an electron , is
incident on a p otential b arrier o f height 10.0 e V.
The kinetic energ y of the imp acting muon is 5.5
eV and only a bout 0.10% o f the square d
amplitude o f its inc oming w ave function filters
through the b arrier . Wha t is the b arrier ’s width?
76.A grain o f sand with mas s 1.0 mg and kinetic
energ y 1.0 J is incident on a p otential energ y
barrier with height 1.000001 J and width 2500
nm. Ho w man y grains o f sand ha ve to fall on
this b arrier b efore, on the a verage, one p asses
through?
Additional P roblems
77.Sho w tha t if the unc ertainty in the p osition o f a
particle is on the order o f its de Broglie ’s
wavelength , then the unc ertainty in its
momentum is on the order o f the v alue o f its
momentum .
78.The mas s of a -meson is me asure d to b e
with an unc ertainty o f .
Estima te the lif etime o f this meson .
79.A particle o f mas smis confine d to a b ox of
width L. If the p article is in the firs t excited
state, wha t are the prob abilities o f finding the
particle in a region o f width 0.020 Laround the
given p oint x: (a) ; (b) ; (c)
; and (d) .
80.A particle in a b ox [0; L] is in the third e xcited
state. Wha t are its mos t prob able p ositions?81.A 0.20-k g billiard b all b ounc es b ack and f orth
without losing its energ y between the cushions
of a 1.5 m long ta ble. (a) If the b all is in its
ground s tate, how man y years do es it nee d to
get from one cushion to the other? Y ou ma y
comp are this time inter val to the a ge of the
univ erse . (b) Ho w much energ y is re quire d to
mak e the b all g o from its ground s tate to its firs t
excited state? C omp are it with the kinetic
energ y of the b all mo ving a t 2.0 m/s .
82.Find the e xpecta tion v alue o f the p osition
square d when the p article in the b ox is in its
third e xcited state and the length o f the b ox is L.
83.Consider an infinite square w ell with w all
boundaries and Sho w tha t the
function is the solution to the
stationar y Schrӧding er e qua tion f or the p article
in a b ox only if ℏExplain wh y this
is an ac cepta ble w ave function only if kis an
integ er multiple o f7 • Chap ter Re view 345

84.Consider an infinite square w ell with w all
boundaries and Explain wh y the
function is not a solution to the
stationar y Schrӧding er e qua tion f or the p article
in a b ox.
85.Atoms in a cr ystal la ttice vibra te in simple
harmonic motion . Assuming a la ttice atom has a
mas s of , wha t is the f orce
constant o f the la ttice if a la ttice atom mak es a
transition from the ground s tate to firs t excited
state when it a bsorbs a photon?86.A dia tomic molecule b ehaves lik e a quantum
harmonic oscilla tor with the f orce constant 12.0
N/m and mas s . (a) Wha t is the
wavelength o f the emit ted photon when the
molecule mak es the transition from the third
excited state to the sec ond e xcited state? ( b)
Find the ground s tate energ y of vibra tions f or
this dia tomic molecule .
87.An electron with kinetic energ y 2.0 Me V
encounters a p otential energ y barrier o f height
16.0 Me V and width 2.00 nm . Wha t is the
prob ability tha t the electron emerg es on the
other side o f the b arrier?
88.A beam o f mono -energ etic protons with energ y
2.0 Me V falls on a p otential energ y barrier o f
height 20.0 Me V and o f width 1.5 fm . Wha t
percenta ge of the b eam is transmit ted through
the b arrier?
Challenge P roblems
89.An electron in a long , org anic molecule use d in
a dy e laser b ehaves appro xima tely lik e a
quantum p article in a b ox with width 4.18 nm .
Find the emit ted photon when the electron
mak es a transition from the firs t excited state to
the ground s tate and from the sec ond e xcited
state to the firs t excited state.
90.In S TM, an elev ation o f the tip a bove the sur face
being sc anne d can b e determine d with a gre at
precision , because the tunneling-electron
current b etween sur face atoms and the a toms o f
the tip is e xtremely sensitiv e to the v aria tion o f
the sep aration g ap b etween them from p oint to
point along the sur face. Assuming tha t the
tunneling-electron current is in direct
prop ortion to the tunneling prob ability and tha t
the tunneling prob ability is to a g ood
appro xima tion e xpres sed by the e xponential
function with , determine
the ra tio o f the tunneling current when the tip is
0.500 nm a bove the sur face to the current when
the tip is 0.515 nm a bove the sur face.91.If STM is to detect sur face features with lo cal
heights o f about 0.00200 nm , wha t percent
chang e in tunneling-electron current mus t the
STM electronics b e able to detect? As sume tha t
the tunneling-electron current has
characteris tics giv en in the prec eding problem .
92.Use Heisenb erg’s unc ertainty principle to
estima te the ground s tate energ y of a p article
oscilla ting on an spring with angular fre quency ,
, where kis the spring c onstant and
mis the mas s.
93.Supp ose an infinite square w ell e xtends from
to . Solv e the time -indep endent
Schrӧding er’s equa tion to find the allo wed
energies and s tationar y states o f a p article with
mas smthat is c onfine d to this w ell. Then sho w
that these solutions c an b e obtaine d by making
the c oordina te trans forma tion for
the solutions obtaine d for the w ell e xtending
between 0 and L.
94.A particle o f mas smconfine d to a b ox of width
Lis in its firs t excited state . (a) F ind its
average position ( which is the e xpecta tion v alue
of the p osition). ( b) Where is the p article mos t
likely to b e found?346 7 • Chap ter Re view
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

INTR ODUCTIONCHAP TER 8
Atomic Structur e
8.1The Hy drogen A tom
8.2Orbital Magne tic Dipole Moment o f the Elec tron
8.3Electron Spin
8.4The Ex clusion P rinciple and the P eriodic T able
8.5Atomic Spec tra and X -rays
8.6Laser s
In this chapter , we use quantum mechanics to s tudy the s tructure and prop erties o f atoms .
This s tudy intro duces ide as and c oncepts tha t are nec essary to unders tand more c omple x systems , such as
molecules , crystals, and metals . As w e deep en our unders tanding o f atoms , we build on things w e alre ady
kno w, such as R uther ford’s nucle ar mo del o f the a tom , Bohr ’s mo del o f the h ydrog en a tom , and de Broglie ’s
wave hypothesis .
Figure 8.1 is NG C1763, an emis sion nebula in the small g alaxy kno wn as the Larg e Ma gellanic Cloud , which is
a sa tellite o f the Milky W ay Galaxy . Ultra violet light from hot s tars ioniz es the h ydrog en a toms in the nebula. As
Figur e8.1 NGC1763 is an emis sion nebula in the L arge Mag ellanic Cloud, which is a sat ellite galaxy t o our Milky
Way Galaxy . The c olors w e see can be e xplained b y appl ying the ideas o f quantum mechanics t o atomic s tructur e.
(credit: modification o f work b y NASA , ESA , and Josh L ake)
Chap ter Outline

protons and electrons rec ombine , radia tion o f diff erent fre quencies is emit ted. The details o f this pro cess can
be correctly pre dicte d by quantum mechanics and are e xamine d in this chapter .
8.1The Hy drogen A tom
Learning Objectiv es
By the end o f this section, y ou wil l be able t o:
•Describe the hy drogen atom in terms o f wave func tion, pr obabilit y densit y, total ener gy, and orbital angular
momentum
•Identif y the phy sical significance o f each o f the quantum number s ( ) of the hy drogen atom
•Distinguish be tween the Bohr and Schr ödinger models o f the atom
•Use quantum number s to calculate impor tant inf ormation about the hy drogen atom
The h ydrog en a tom is the simples t atom in na ture and , theref ore, a g ood starting p oint to s tudy a toms and
atomic s tructure . The h ydrog en a tom c onsis ts of a single neg atively charg ed electron tha t mo ves a bout a
positiv ely charg ed proton ( Figure 8.2 ). In Bohr ’s mo del, the electron is pulle d around the proton in a p erfectly
circular orbit b y an a ttractiv e Coulomb f orce. The proton is appro xima tely 1800 times more mas sive than the
electron , so the proton mo ves v ery little in resp onse to the f orce on the proton b y the electron . (This is
analog ous to the Ear th-Sun s ystem , where the Sun mo ves v ery little in resp onse to the f orce exerted on it b y
Earth.) An e xplana tion o f this eff ect using N ewton ’s laws is giv en in Photons and Ma tter W aves.
Figur e8.2 A representation o f the Bohr model of the h ydrogen at om.
With the as sumption o f a fix ed proton , we focus on the motion o f the electron .
In the electric field o f the proton , the p otential energ y of the electron is
where and ris the dis tanc e between the electron and the proton . As w e sa w earlier , the f orce on an
object is e qual to the neg ative of the gradient (or slop e) of the p otential energ y function . For the sp ecial c ase o f
a hydrog en a tom , the f orce between the electron and proton is an a ttractiv e Coulomb f orce.
Notice tha t the p otential energ y function U(r) do es not v ary in time . As a result ,Schrö ding er’s equa tion of the
hydrog en a tom re duces to tw o simpler e qua tions: one tha t dep ends only on sp ace (x,y,z) and another tha t
dep ends only on time ( t). (The sep aration o f a w ave function into sp ace- and time -dep endent p arts for time -
indep endent p otential energ y functions is discus sed in Quantum Mechanics .) W e are mos t interes ted in the
space-dep endent e qua tion:
where is the three -dimensional w ave function o f the electron , is the mas s of the electron ,
and Eis the total energ y of the electron . Recall tha t the total w ave function is the pro duct o f the
space-dep endent w ave function and the time -dep endent w ave function .8.1
ℏ
8.2348 8 • A tomic S tructure
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

In addition to b eing time -indep endent ,U(r) is also spheric ally s ymmetric al. This sugg ests tha t we ma y solv e
Schrö ding er’s equa tion more e asily if w e expres s it in terms o f the spheric al coordina tes instead o f
rectangular c oordina tes . A spheric al coordina te system is sho wn in Figure 8.3 . In spheric al
coordina tes, the v aria bleris the radial c oordina te,is the p olar angle (rela tive to the v erticalz-axis), and is
the azimuthal angle (rela tive to the x-axis). The rela tionship b etween spheric al and rectangular c oordina tes is
Figur e8.3 The r elationship betw een the spherical and r ectang ular c oordinat e systems .
The factor is the ma gnitude o f a v ector f orme d by the projection o f the p olar v ector onto the xy-plane .
Also, the c oordina tes o fxand yare obtaine d by projecting this v ector onto the x- and y-axes, resp ectiv ely. The
inverse trans forma tion giv es
Schrö ding er’s wave equa tion f or the h ydrog en a tom in spheric al coordina tes is discus sed in more adv anced
courses in mo dern ph ysics , so w e do not c onsider it in detail here . Ho wever, due to the spheric al symmetr y of
U(r), this e qua tion re duces to three simpler e qua tions: one f or e ach o f the three c oordina tes
Solutions to the time -indep endent w ave function are writ ten as a pro duct o f three functions:
where Ris the radial function dep endent on the radial c oordina teronly; is the p olar function dep endent on
the p olar c oordina te only; and is the phi function o fonly . Valid solutions to Schrö ding er’s equa tion
are la beled by the quantum numb ersn,l, and m.
(The re asons f or these names will b e explaine d in the ne xt section .) The radial function Rdep ends only on n
and l; the p olar function dep ends only on land m; and the phi function dep ends only on m. The
dep endenc e of each function on quantum numb ers is indic ated with subscripts:
Not all sets o f quantum numb ers ( n,l,m) are p ossible . For e xample , the orbital angular quantum numb erlcan
never b e gre ater or e qual to the princip al quantum numb er . Specific ally, we ha ve8.1 • The Hy drogen A tom 349

Notice tha t for the ground s tate, , , and . In other w ords , there is only one quantum s tate with
the w ave function f or , and it is . Ho wever, for , we ha ve
Theref ore, the allo wed states f or the state are , , and . Example w ave functions f or
the h ydrog en a tom are giv en in Table 8.1 . Note tha t some o f these e xpres sions c ontain the let teri, which
represents . When prob abilities are c alcula ted, these c omple x numb ers do not app ear in the final ans wer.
Table 8.1Wave Functions o f the Hy drog en A tom
Physical Significance o f the Quantum Number s
Each o f the three quantum numb ers o f the h ydrog en a tom ( n,l,m) is as sociated with a diff erent ph ysical
quantity . The princip al quantum numb ernis as sociated with the total energ y of the electron , . According
to Schrö ding er’s equa tion:
where Notice tha t this e xpres sion is identic al to tha t of Bohr ’s mo del. As in the Bohr mo del,
the electron in a p articular s tate of energ y do es not radia te.
EXAMPLE 8.1
How Man y Possible S tates?
For the h ydrog en a tom , how man y possible quantum s tates c orresp ond to the princip al numb er ? Wha t
are the energies o f these s tates?
Strategy
For a h ydrog en a tom o f a giv en energ y, the numb er o f allo wed states dep ends on its orbital angular
momentum . We can c ount these s tates f or e ach v alue o f the princip al quantum numb er, However,
the total energ y dep ends on the princip al quantum numb er only , which me ans tha t we can use Equa tion 8.3
and the numb er o f states c ounte d.
Solution
If , the allo wed values o flare 0, 1, and 2. If , (1 state). If , (3 states); and if
, (5 states). In total , there are allowed states. Bec ause the total energ y
dep ends only on the princip al quantum numb er, , the energ y of each o f these s tates is8.3350 8 • A tomic S tructure
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Significanc e
An electron in a h ydrog en a tom c an o ccup y man y diff erent angular momentum s tates with the v ery same
energ y. As the orbital angular momentum incre ases , the numb er o f the allo wed states with the same energ y
incre ases .
The angular momentum orbital quantum numb erlis as sociated with the orbital angular momentum o f the
electron in a h ydrog en a tom . Quantum theor y tells us tha t when the h ydrog en a tom is in the s tate , the
magnitude o f its orbital angular momentum is
where
This result is slightly diff erent from tha t found with Bohr ’s theor y, which quantiz es angular momentum
according to the r ule
Quantum s tates with diff erent v alues o f orbital angular momentum are dis tinguishe d using spectrosc opic
nota tion (Table 8.2 ). The designa tions s,p,d, and fresult from e arly his toric al attempts to clas sify atomic
spectral lines . (The let ters s tand f or sharp , princip al, diffuse , and fundamental , resp ectiv ely.) After f, the let ters
continue alpha betically.
The ground s tateof hydrog en is designa ted as the 1 sstate, where “1” indic ates the energ y lev el and “ s”
indic ates the orbital angular momentum s tate ( ). When ,lcan b e either 0 or 1. The , state
is designa ted “2 s.” The , state is designa ted “2 p.” When ,lcan b e 0, 1, or 2, and the s tates are
3s, 3p, and 3 d, resp ectiv ely. Notation f or other quantum s tates is giv en in Table 8.3 .
The angular momentum project ion quantum numb ermis as sociated with the azimuthal angle (see Figure
8.3) and is rela ted to the z-comp onent o f orbital angular momentum o f an electron in a h ydrog en a tom . This
comp onent is giv en b y
where
The z-comp onent o f angular momentum is rela ted to the ma gnitude o f angular momentum b y
where is the angle b etween the angular momentum v ector and the z-axis . Note tha t the direction o f the z-axis
is determine d by experiment —tha t is, along an y direction , the e xperimenter decides to me asure the angular
momentum . For e xample , the z-direction might c orresp ond to the direction o f an e xternal ma gnetic field . The
rela tionship b etween is giv en in Figure 8.4 .ℏ 8.4
ℏ 8.5
8.68.1 • The Hy drogen A tom 351

Figur e8.4 The z-component o f ang ular momentum is quantiz ed with its o wn quantum number m.
Orbital Quantum Number lAngular Momentum State Spec troscopic Name
0 0 s Sharp
1 p Princip al
2 d Diffuse
3 f Fundamental
4 g
5 h
Table 8.2Spectrosc opic N otation and Orbital Angular Momentum
1s
2s 2p
3s 3p 3d
4s 4p 4d 4f
5s 5p 5d 5f 5g
6s 6p 6d 6f 6g 6h
Table 8.3Spectrosc opic Description o f Quantum Sta tes
The quantiza tion o f is equiv alent to the quantiza tion o f. Subs tituting ℏforLand mfor into
this e qua tion , we find352 8 • A tomic S tructure
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Thus , the angle is quantiz ed with the p articular v alues
Notice tha t both the p olar angle ( ) and the projection o f the angular momentum v ector onto an arbitrar y
z-axis ( ) are quantiz ed.
The quantiza tion o f the p olar angle f or the state is sho wn in Figure 8.5 . The orbital angular momentum
vector lies somewhere on the sur face of a c one with an op ening angle rela tive to the z-axis (unles s in
which c ase and the v ector p oints are p erpendicular to the z-axis).
Figur e8.5 The quantization o f orbital ang ular momentum. Each v ector lies on the sur face of a c one with axis along the z-axis .
A detaile d study o f angular momentum rev eals tha t we cannot kno w all three c omp onents simultaneously . In
the previous section , the z-comp onent o f orbital angular momentum has definite v alues tha t dep end on the
quantum numb erm. This implies tha t we cannot kno w both x-and y-comp onents o f angular momentum ,
and , with c ertainty . As a result , the precise direction o f the orbital angular momentum v ector is unkno wn.
EXAMPLE 8.2
Wha t Are the Al lowed Dir ections?
Calcula te the angles tha t the angular momentum v ector can mak e with the z-axis f or , as sho wn in
Figure 8.6 .ℏ ℏ 8.7
8.88.1 • The Hy drogen A tom 353

Figur e8.6 The c omponent o f a giv en ang ular momentum along the z-axis (defined b y the dir ection o f a magnetic field) can ha ve onl y
certain v alues . These ar e sho wn her e for , for which The dir ection o fis quantiz ed in the sense that it can ha ve
only certain angles r elativ e to the z-axis .
Strategy
The v ectors and (in the z-direction) f orm a right triangle , where is the h ypotenuse and is the
adjac ent side . The ra tio o f to | | is the c osine o f the angle o f interes t. The ma gnitudes and are
given b y
ℏ ℏ
Solution
We are giv en , so mlcan b e Thus ,Lhas the v alue giv en b y
ℏ ℏ
The quantity can ha ve three v alues , giv en b y ℏ.
ℏℏ
ℏ
As y ou c an see in Figure 8.6 , so for , we ha ve
ℏ
ℏ
Thus ,354 8 • A tomic S tructure
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Similarly , for , we find this giv es
Then f or :
ℏ
ℏ
so tha t
Significanc e
The angles are c onsis tent with the figure . Only the angle rela tive to the z-axis is quantiz ed.Lcan p oint in an y
direction as long as it mak es the prop er angle with the z-axis . Thus , the angular momentum v ectors lie on
cones , as illus trated. To see ho w the c orresp ondenc e principle holds here , consider tha t the smalles t angle (
in the e xample) is f or the maximum v alue o f namely For tha t smalles t angle ,
which appro aches 1 as lbecomes v ery larg e. If , then . Furthermore , for larg el, there are man y
values o f , so tha t all angles b ecome p ossible as lgets v ery larg e.
CHE CK Y OUR UNDER STANDING 8.1
Can the ma gnitude o f ever b e equal to L?
Using the W ave Function to Mak e Predictions
As w e sa w earlier , we can use quantum mechanics to mak e pre dictions a bout ph ysical ev ents b y the use o f
prob ability s tatements . It is theref ore prop er to s tate, “An electron is lo cated within this v olume with this
prob ability a t this time ,” but not , “An electron is lo cated at the p osition ( x,y,z) at this time .” To determine the
prob ability o f finding an electron in a h ydrog en a tom in a p articular region o f space, it is nec essary to integra te
the prob ability density over tha t region:
where dVis an infinitesimal v olume element . If this integral is c ompute d for all sp ace, the result is 1, b ecause
the prob ability o f the p article to b e locatedsomewhere is 100% (the normaliza tion condition). In a more
advanced course on mo dern ph ysics , you will find tha t where is the c omple x
conjug ate. This elimina tes the o ccurrenc es o f in the a bove calcula tion .
Consider an electron in a s tate of zero angular momentum ( ). In this c ase, the electron ’s wave function
dep ends only on the radial c oordina ter. (Refer to the s tates and inTable 8.1 .) The infinitesimal
volume element c orresp onds to a spheric al shell o f radius rand infinitesimal thicknes sdr, writ ten as
The prob ability o f finding the electron in the region rto (“at appro xima tely r”) is
Here P(r) is c alled the radial prob abilit y densit y funct ion (a prob ability p er unit length). F or an electron in the8.9
8.10
8.118.1 • The Hy drogen A tom 355

ground s tate of hydrog en, the prob ability o f finding an electron in the region rto is
where angs troms . The radial prob ability density function P(r) is plot ted in Figure 8.7 . The are a under
the cur ve between an y tw o radial p ositions , say and , giv es the prob ability o f finding the electron in tha t
radial rang e. To find the mos t prob able radial p osition , we set the firs t deriv ative of this function to z ero
( ) and solv e forr. The mos t prob able radial p osition is not e qual to the a verage or e xpecta tion v alue
of the radial p osition b ecause is not s ymmetric al about its p eak v alue .
Figur e8.7 The r adial pr obability density function f or the gr ound s tate of hydrogen.
If the electron has orbital angular momentum ( ), then the w ave functions representing the electron
dep end on the angles and that is, (r,,). Atomic orbitals f or three s tates with and
are sho wn in Figure 8.8 . An atomic orbital is a region in sp ace tha t encloses a c ertain p ercenta ge (usually
90%) o f the electron prob ability . (Sometimes a tomic orbitals are ref erre d to as “ clouds” o f prob ability .) Notice
that these dis tributions are pronounc ed in c ertain directions . This directionality is imp ortant to chemis ts
when the y analyz e ho w atoms are b ound tog ether to f orm molecules .
Figur e8.8 The pr obability density dis tributions f or thr ee s tates with and . The dis tributions ar e dir ected along the (a) x-axis ,
(b)y-axis , and (c) z-axis .
A slightly diff erent representa tion o f the w ave function is giv en in Figure 8.9 . In this c ase, light and dark
regions indic ate lo cations o f rela tively high and lo w prob ability , resp ectiv ely. In c ontras t to the Bohr mo del o f
the h ydrog en a tom , the electron do es not mo ve around the proton nucleus in a w ell-define d path. Indee d, the
unc ertainty principle mak es it imp ossible to kno w ho w the electron g ets from one plac e to another .8.12356 8 • A tomic S tructure
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Figur e8.9 Probability clouds f or the electr on in the gr ound s tate and se veral excited s tates o f hydrogen. The pr obability o f finding the
electr on is indicat ed b y the shade o f color; the light er the c oloring , the gr eater the chanc e of finding the electr on.
8.2Orbital Magne tic Dipole Moment o f the Elec tron
Learning Objectiv es
By the end o f this section, y ou wil l be able t o:
•Explain why the hy drogen atom has magne tic pr oper ties
•Explain why the ener gy le vels o f a hy drogen atom associated with orbital angular momentum ar e split b y an
external magne tic field
•Use quantum number s to calculate the magnitude and dir ection o f the orbital magne tic dipole moment o f a
hydrogen atom
In Bohr ’s mo del o f the h ydrog en a tom , the electron mo ves in a circular orbit around the proton . The electron
passes b y a p articular p oint on the lo op in a c ertain time , so w e can c alcula te a current . An electron
that orbits a proton in a h ydrog en a tom is theref ore analog ous to current flo wing through a circular wire
(Figure 8.10 ). In the s tudy o f ma gnetism , we sa w tha t a current -carrying wire pro duces ma gnetic fields . It is
theref ore re asona ble to c onclude tha t the h ydrog en a tom pro duces a ma gnetic field and interacts with other
magnetic fields .8.2 • Orbital Magne tic Dipole Moment o f the Elec tron 357

Figur e8.10 (a) Curr ent flo wing thr ough a cir cular wir e is analog ous t o (b) an electr on that orbits a pr oton in a h ydrogen at om.
The orbital ma gnet ic dip ole moment is a me asure o f the s trength o f the ma gnetic field pro duced by the
orbital angular momentum o f an electron . From Force and T orque on a Current Lo op, the ma gnitude o f the
orbital ma gnetic dip ole moment f or a current lo op is
where Iis the current and Ais the are a of the lo op. (For brevity , we ref er to this as the ma gnetic moment .) The
current Iassociated with an electron in orbit a bout a proton in a h ydrog en a tom is
where eis the ma gnitude o f the electron charg e and Tis its orbital p erio d. If w e as sume tha t the electron
travels in a p erfectly circular orbit , the orbital p erio d is
where ris the radius o f the orbit and vis the sp eed of the electron in its orbit . Giv en tha t the are a of a circle is
, the a bsolute ma gnetic moment is
It is helpful to e xpres s the ma gnetic momentum in terms o f the orbital angular momentum
Because the electron orbits in a circle , the p osition v ector and the momentum v ector form a right angle .
Thus , the ma gnitude o f the orbital angular momentum is
Combining these tw o equa tions , we ha ve
In full v ector f orm , this e xpres sion is writ ten as
The neg ative sign app ears b ecause the electron has a neg ative charg e. Notice tha t the direction o f the ma gnetic
moment o f the electron is antip arallel to the orbital angular momentum , as sho wn in Figure 8.10 (b). In the
Bohr mo del o f the a tom , the rela tionship b etween and inEqua tion 8.19 is indep endent o f the radius o f the
orbit .
The ma gnetic moment can also b e expres sed in terms o f the orbital angular quantum numb erl. Combining
Equa tion 8.18 and Equa tion 8.15 , the ma gnitude o f the ma gnetic moment is8.13
8.14
8.15
8.16
8.17
8.18
8.19358 8 • A tomic S tructure
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

The z-comp onent o f the ma gnetic moment is
The quantity is a fundamental unit o f ma gnetism c alled the Bohr ma gneton , which has the v alue
(J/T) or Quantiza tion o f the ma gnetic moment is the result o f
quantiza tion o f the orbital angular momentum .
As w e will see in the ne xt section , the total ma gnetic dip ole moment o f the h ydrog en a tom is due to b oth the
orbital motion o f the electron and its intrinsic spin . For no w, we ignore the eff ect o f electron spin .
EXAMPLE 8.3
Orbital Magnetic Dipole Moment
Wha t is the ma gnitude o f the orbital dip ole ma gnetic moment of an electron in the h ydrog en a tom in the (a) s
state, (b)pstate, and (c) dstate? (As sume tha t the spin o f the electron is z ero.)
Strategy
The ma gnetic momentum o f the electron is rela ted to its orbital angular momentum L. For the h ydrog en a tom ,
this quantity is rela ted to the orbital angular quantum numb erl. The s tates are giv en in sp ectrosc opic
nota tion , which rela tes a let ter ( s,p,d, etc .) to a quantum numb er.
Solution
The ma gnitude o f the ma gnetic moment is giv en in Equa tion 8.20 :
ℏ
a.For the sstate, so w e ha ve and
b.For the pstate, and w e ha ve
c.For the dstate, and w e obtain
Significanc e
In the sstate, there is no orbital angular momentum and theref ore no ma gnetic moment . This do es not me an
that the electron is a t res t, jus t tha t the o verall motion o f the electron do es not pro duce a ma gnetic field . In the
pstate, the electron has a ma gnetic moment with three p ossible v alues f or the z-comp onent o f this ma gnetic
moment; this me ans tha t ma gnetic moment c an p oint in three diff erent p olar directions —each antip arallel to
the orbital angular momentum v ector . In the dstate, the electron has a ma gnetic moment with fiv e possible
values f or the z-comp onent o f this ma gnetic moment . In this c ase, the ma gnetic moment c an p oint in fiv eℏ 8.20
ℏ 8.218.2 • Orbital Magne tic Dipole Moment o f the Elec tron 359

different p olar directions .
A hydrog en a tom has a ma gnetic field , so w e expect the h ydrog en a tom to interact with an e xternal ma gnetic
field—such as the push and pull b etween tw o bar ma gnets . From Force and T orque on a Current Lo op, we kno w
that when a current lo op interacts with an e xternal ma gnetic field , it e xperienc es a torque giv en b y
where Iis the current ,is the are a of the lo op,is the ma gnetic moment , and is the e xternal ma gnetic field .
This torque acts to rota te the ma gnetic moment v ector o f the h ydrog en a tom to align with the e xternal
magnetic field . Bec ause mechanic al w ork is done b y the e xternal ma gnetic field on the h ydrog en a tom , we can
talk a bout energ y trans forma tions in the a tom . The p otential energ y of the h ydrog en a tom as sociated with this
magnetic interaction is giv en b yEqua tion 8.23 :
If the ma gnetic moment is antip arallel to the e xternal ma gnetic field , the p otential energ y is larg e, but if the
magnetic moment is p arallel to the field , the p otential energ y is small . Work done on the h ydrog en a tom to
rota te the a tom ’s ma gnetic moment v ector in the direction o f the e xternal ma gnetic field is theref ore
associated with a drop in p otential energ y. The energ y of the s ystem is c onser ved, however, because a drop in
potential energ y pro duces radia tion (the emis sion o f a photon). These energ y transitions are quantiz ed
because the ma gnetic moment c an p oint in only c ertain directions .
If the e xternal ma gnetic field p oints in the p ositiv ez-direction , the p otential energ y as sociated with the orbital
magnetic dip ole moment is
where is the Bohr ma gneton and mis the angular momentum projection quantum numb er (or magnet ic
orbital quantum numb er), which has the v alues
For e xample , in the electron s tate, the total energ y of the electron is split into three dis tinct energ y lev els
corresp onding to
The split ting o f energ y lev els b y an e xternal ma gnetic field is c alled the Zeeman eff ect. Ignoring the eff ects o f
electron spin , transitions from the state to a c ommon lo wer energ y state pro duce three closely sp aced
spectral lines ( Figure 8.11 , left c olumn). Lik ewise , transitions from the state pro duce fiv e closely sp aced
spectral lines (right c olumn). The sep aration o f these lines is prop ortional to the s trength o f the e xternal
magnetic field . This eff ect has man y applic ations . For e xample , the split ting o f lines in the h ydrog en sp ectr um
of the Sun is use d to determine the s trength o f the Sun ’s ma gnetic field . Man y such ma gnetic field
measurements c an b e use d to mak e a map o f the ma gnetic activity a t the Sun ’s sur face called amagnetogram
(Figure 8.12 ).8.22
8.23
8.24
8.25360 8 • A tomic S tructure
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Figur e8.11 The Z eeman eff ect r efers t o the split ting o f spectr al lines b y an e xternal magnetic field. In the left c olumn, the ener gy
split ting oc curs due t o transitions fr om the s tate ) to a lo wer ener gy state; and in the right c olumn, ener gy split ting oc curs due
to transitions fr om the s tate to a lo wer-ener gy state. The separ ation o f these lines is pr opor tional t o the s trength o f the
external magnetic field.
Figur e8.12 A magnet ogram o f the Sun. The bright and dark spots sho w significant magnetic activity at the sur face of the Sun. (cr edit:
NASA , SDO)
8.3Electron Spin
Learning Objectiv es
By the end o f this section, y ou wil l be able t o:
•Expr ess the s tate o f an elec tron in a hy drogen atom in terms o f five quantum number s
•Use quantum number s to calculate the magnitude and dir ection o f the spin and magne tic moment o f an
electron
•Explain the fine and hyper fine s tructure of the hy drogen spec trum in terms o f magne tic inter actions inside
the hy drogen atom
In this section , we consider the eff ects o f electron spin . Spin intro duces tw o additional quantum numb ers to
our mo del o f the h ydrog en a tom . Both w ere disc overed by looking a t the fine s tructure o f atomic sp ectra. S pin8.3 • Elec tron Spin 361

is a fundamental characteris tic o f all p articles , not jus t electrons , and is analog ous to the intrinsic spin o f
extende d bodies a bout their o wn ax es, such as the daily rota tion o f Ear th.
Spin is quantiz ed in the same manner as orbital angular momentum . It has b een f ound tha t the ma gnitude o f
the intrinsic spin angular momentum Sof an electron is giv en b y
where sis define d to b e the spin quantum numb er. This is similar to the quantiza tion o fLgiven in Equa tion
8.4, except tha t the only v alue allo wed forsfor an electron is The electron is said to b e a “ spin-half
particle .” The spin project ion quantum numb er is as sociated with the z-comp onents o f spin , expres sed by
In g eneral , the allo wed quantum numb ers are
For the sp ecial c ase o f an electron ( ),
Directions o f intrinsic spin are quantiz ed, jus t as the y were f or orbital angular momentum . The
state is c alled the “ spin-do wn” state and has a z-comp onent o f spin , ; state is c alled
the “ spin-up ” state and has a z-comp onent o f spin , These s tates are sho wn in Figure 8.13 .
Figur e8.13 The tw o pos sible s tates o f electr on spin.
The intrinsic ma gnetic dip ole moment o f an electron can also b e expres sed in terms o f the spin quantum
numb er. In analog y to the orbital angular momentum , the ma gnitude o f the electron ma gnetic moment is
According to the sp ecial theor y of rela tivity , this v alue is lo w by a factor o f 2. Thus , in v ector f orm , the spin
magnetic moment isℏ 8.26
ℏ 8.27
8.28
8.29
8.30362 8 • A tomic S tructure
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

The z-comp onent o f the ma gnetic moment is
The spin projection quantum numb er has jus t two values so the z-comp onent o f the ma gnetic
moment also has jus t two values:
where is one Bohr ma gneton . An electron is ma gnetic , so w e expect the electron to interact with other
magnetic fields . We consider tw o sp ecial c ases: the interaction o f a free electron with an e xternal (nonunif orm)
magnetic field , and an electron in a h ydrog en a tom with a ma gnetic field pro duced by the orbital angular
momentum o f the electron .
EXAMPLE 8.4
Electr on Spin and R adia tion
A hydrog en a tom in the ground s tate is plac ed in an e xternal unif orm ma gnetic field ( ). Determine
the fre quency o f radia tion pro duced in a transition b etween the spin-up and spin-do wn s tates o f the electron .
Strategy
The spin projection quantum numb er is , so the z-comp onent o f the ma gnetic moment is
ℏ
The p otential energ y as sociated with the interaction b etween the electron ma gnetic moment and the e xternal
magnetic field is
The fre quency o f light emit ted is prop ortional to the energ y ( ) diff erenc e between these tw o states.
Solution
The energ y diff erenc e between these s tates is , so the fre quency o f radia tion pro duced is
Significanc e
The electron ma gnetic moment c ouples with the e xternal ma gnetic field . The energ y of this s ystem is diff erent
whether the electron is aligne d or not with the proton . The fre quency o f radia tion pro duced by a transition
between these s tates is prop ortional to the energ y diff erenc e. If w e double the s trength o f the ma gnetic field ,
holding all other things c onstant , the fre quency o f the radia tion doubles and its w avelength is cut in half.
In a h ydrog en a tom , the electron ma gnetic moment c an interact with the ma gnetic field pro duced by the
orbital angular momentum o f the electron , a phenomenon c alledspin-orbit c oupling . The orbital angular
momentum ( ), orbital ma gnetic moment ( ), spin angular momentum ( ), and spin ma gnetic moment ( )
vectors are sho wn tog ether in Figure 8.14 .
Just as the energ y lev els o f a h ydrog en a tom c an b e split b y an external magnetic field , so to o are the energ y8.31
ℏ 8.32
ℏ ℏ 8.338.3 • Elec tron Spin 363

levels o f a h ydrog en a tom split b yinternal magnetic fields o f the a tom . If the ma gnetic moment o f the electron
and orbital ma gnetic moment o f the electron are antip arallel , the p otential energ y from the ma gnetic
interaction is rela tively high , but when these moments are p arallel , the p otential energ y is rela tively small .
Transition from e ach o f these tw o states to a lo wer-energ y lev el results in the emis sion o f a photon o f slightly
different fre quency . Tha t is, the spin-orbit c oupling “ splits” the sp ectral line e xpecte d from a spin-les s
electron . The fine s tructure of the h ydrog en sp ectr um is e xplaine d by spin-orbit c oupling .
Figur e8.14 Spin-orbit c oupling is the int eraction o f an electr on’s spin magnetic moment with its orbital magnetic moment .
The Stern-Gerlach e xperiment provides e xperimental evidenc e tha t electrons ha ve spin angular momentum .
The e xperiment p asses a s tream o f silv er (Ag ) atoms through an e xternal , nonunif orm ma gnetic field . The Ag
atom has an orbital angular momentum o f zero and c ontains a single unp aire d electron in the outer shell .
Theref ore, the total angular momentum o f the Ag a tom is due entirely to the spin o f the outer electron
( . Due to electron spin , the Ag a toms act as tin y ma gnets as the y pass through the ma gnetic field . These
“ma gnets” ha ve tw o possible orienta tions , which c orresp ond to the spin-up and - down s tates o f the electron .
The ma gnetic field div erts the spin up a toms in one direction and the spin-do wn a toms in another direction .
This pro duces tw o dis tinct b ands on a screen ( Figure 8.15 ).
Figur e8.15 In the St ern-Gerlach e xperiment, an e xternal , nonunif orm magnetic field div erts a beam o f electr ons in tw o diff erent
directions . This r esul t is due t o the quantization o f spin ang ular momentum.
According to clas sical pre dictions , the angular momentum (and , theref ore, the ma gnetic moment) o f the Ag
atom c an p oint in an y direction , so one e xpects , ins tead, a c ontinuous smudg e on the screen . The resulting tw o
bands o f the Stern-Gerlach e xperiment pro vide s tartling supp ort for the ide as o f quantum mechanics .
INTER ACTIVE
VisitPhET Explora tions: Stern-Gerlach Exp eriment (https:/ /openstax.org/l/21s terng erlach) to le arn more
about the Stern-Gerlach e xperiment .364 8 • A tomic S tructure
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

CHE CK Y OUR UNDER STANDING 8.2
If the Stern-Gerlach e xperiment yielde d four dis tinct b ands ins tead o f two, wha t might b e conclude d about the
spin quantum numb er o f the charg ed particle?
Just lik e an electron , a proton is spin 1/2 and has a ma gnetic moment . (According to nucle ar theor y, this
moment is due to the orbital motion o f quarks within the proton .) The hyperfine s tructure of the h ydrog en
spectr um is e xplaine d by the interaction b etween the ma gnetic moment o f the proton and the ma gnetic
moment o f the electron , an interaction kno wn as spin-spin c oupling . The energ y of the electron-proton s ystem
is diff erent dep ending on whether or not the moments are aligne d. Transitions b etween these s tates ( spin-flip
transit ions ) result in the emis sion o f a photon with a w avelength o f (in the radio rang e). The 21- cm
line in a tomic sp ectrosc opy is a “fing erprint ” of hydrog en g as. Astronomers e xploit this sp ectral line to map
the spiral arms o f galaxies , which are c omp osed mos tly o f hydrog en (Figure 8.16 ).
Figur e8.16 The magnetic int eraction betw een the electr on and pr oton in the h ydrogen at om is used t o map the spir al arms o f the
Pinwheel Galaxy (NGC 5457). (a) The g alaxy seen in visible light; (b) the g alaxy seen in 21- cm h ydrogen radiation; (c) the c omposit e imag e
of (a) and (b). Notic e ho w the h ydrogen emis sion penetr ates dus t in the g alaxy t o sho w the spir al arms v ery clearl y, wher eas the g alactic
nucleus sho ws up bet ter in visible light (cr edit a: modification o f work b y ESA & NASA; cr edit b: modification o f work b y Fabian W alter).
A complete sp ecific ation o f the s tate of an electron in a h ydrog en a tom re quires fiv e quantum numb ers: n,l,m,
s, and . The names , symb ols, and allo wed values o f these quantum numb ers are summariz ed in Table 8.4 .
Name Symbol Allowed values
Princip al quantum numb er n 1, 2, 3, …
Angular momentum l 0, 1, 2, … n– 1
Angular momentum projection m
Spin s 1/2 (electrons)
Spin projection
Table 8.4Summar y of Quantum Numb ers o f an Electron in a Hy drog en A tom
Note tha t the intrinsic quantum numb ers intro duced in this section ( sand ms) are v alid f or man y particles , not
just electrons . For e xample , quarks within an a tomic nucleus are also spin-half p articles . As w e will see la ter,
quantum numb ers help to clas sify sub atomic p articles and enter into scientific mo dels tha t attempt to e xplain
how the univ erse w orks .8.3 • Elec tron Spin 365

8.4The Ex clusion P rinciple and the P eriodic T able
Learning Objectiv es
By the end o f this section, y ou wil l be able t o:
•Explain the impor tance o f Pauli’s exclusion principle to an under standing o f atomic s tructure and molecular
bonding
•Explain the s tructure of the periodic table in terms o f the to tal ener gy, orbital angular momentum, and spin o f
individual elec trons in an atom
•Describe the elec tron configur ation o f atoms in the periodic table
So far , we ha ve studie d only h ydrog en, the simples t chemic al element . We ha ve found tha t an electron in the
hydrog en a tom c an b e completely sp ecifie d by fiv e quantum numb ers:
To construct the ground s tate of a neutral multi-electron a tom , ima gine s tarting with a nucleus o f charg eZe
(tha t is, a nucleus o f atomic numb erZ) and then adding Zelectrons one b y one . Assume tha t each electron
moves in a spheric ally s ymmetric al electric field pro duced by the nucleus and all other electrons o f the a tom .
The as sumption is v alid b ecause the electrons are dis tribute d randomly around the nucleus and pro duce an
average electric field (and p otential) tha t is spheric ally s ymmetric al. The electric p otential U(r) for e ach
electron do es not f ollow the simple form b ecause o f interactions b etween electrons , but it turns out tha t
we can s till la bel each individual electron s tate by quantum numb ers, . (The spin quantum
numb ersis the same f or all electrons , so it will not b e use d in this section .)
The s tructure and chemic al prop erties o f atoms are e xplaine d in p art byPauli ’s exclusion principle : No tw o
electrons in an a tom c an ha ve the same v alues f or all f our quantum numb ers This principle is
rela ted to tw o prop erties o f electrons: A ll electrons are identic al (“ when y ou’ve seen one electron , you’ve seen
them all ”) and the y ha ve half -integral spin Sample sets o f quantum numb ers f or the electrons in an
atom are giv en in Table 8.5 . Consis tent with P auli’s exclusion principle , no tw o ro ws of the ta ble ha ve the e xact
same set o f quantum numb ers.
n lm Subshell s ymbol No. of elec trons: subshell No. of elec trons: shell
1 0 0 ½
1s 2 2
1 0 0 –½
2 0 0 ½
2s 2
82 0 0 –½
2 1 –1 ½
2p 62 1 –1 –½
2 1 0 ½
2 1 0 –½8.34366 8 • A tomic S tructure
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

n lm Subshell s ymbol No. of elec trons: subshell No. of elec trons: shell
2 1 1 ½
2 1 1 –½
3 0 0 ½
3s 2
183 0 0 –½
3 1 –1 ½
3p 63 1 –1 –½
3 1 0 ½
3 1 0 –½
3 1 1 ½
3 1 1 –½
3 2 –2 ½
3d 103 2 –2 –½
3 2 –1 ½
3 2 –1 –½
3 2 0 ½
3 2 0 –½
3 2 1 ½
3 2 1 –½
3 2 2 ½
3 2 2 –½
Table 8.5Electron Sta tes o f Atoms Because o f Pauli’s exclusion principle , no tw o electrons in an a tom ha ve
the same set o f four quantum numb ers.
Electrons with the same princip al quantum numb ernare said to b e in the same shell , and those tha t ha ve the
same v alue o flare said to o ccup y the same subshell . An electron in the state of a h ydrog en a tom is
denote d 1s, where the firs t digit indic ates the shell and the let ter indic ates the subshell
Two electrons in the state are denote d as where the
superscript indic ates the numb er o f electrons . An electron in the state with is denote d 2p. The
combina tion o f two electrons in the and state, and three electrons in the and state is
writ ten as and so on . This representa tion o f the electron s tate is c alled the electron c onfigurat ion of8.4 • The Ex clusion P rinciple and the P eriodic T able 367

the a tom . The electron c onfigura tions f or sev eral a toms are giv en in Table 8.6 . Electrons in the outer shell o f an
atom are c alledvalenc e electron s. Chemic al bonding b etween a toms in a molecule are e xplaine d by the
trans fer and sharing o f valenc e electrons .
Element Electron C onfigur ation Spin Alignment
H
He
Li
Be
B
C
N
O
F
Ne
Na
Mg
Al
Table 8.6Electron C onfigura tions o f Electrons in an A tom The s ymb ol indic ates an unp aire d electron in
the outer shell , where as the s ymb ol indic ates a p air o f spin-up and - down electrons in an outer shell .
The maximum numb er o f electrons in a subshell dep ends on the v alue o f the angular momentum quantum
numb er,l. For a giv en a v alue l, there are orbital angular momentum s tates. Ho wever, each o f these
states c an b e fille d by tw o electrons (spin up and do wn,). Thus , the maximum numb er o f electrons in a
subshell is
In the 2 s subshell , the maximum numb er o f electrons is 2. In the 2 p( ) subshell , the maximum
numb er o f electrons is 6. Theref ore, the total maximum numb er o f electrons in the shell (including b oth
the and 1 subshells) is or 8. In g eneral , the maximum numb er o f electrons in the nth shell is
EXAMPLE 8.5
Subshel ls and T otals f or
How man y subshells are in the shell? Identif y each subshell and c alcula te the maximum numb er o f
electrons tha t will fill e ach. Sho w tha t the maximum numb er o f electrons tha t fill an a tom is .8.35368 8 • A tomic S tructure
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Strategy
Subshells are determine d by the v alue o fl; thus , we firs t determine which v alues o flare allo wed, and then w e
apply the e qua tion “maximum numb er o f electrons tha t can b e in a subshell ” to find the numb er
of electrons in e ach subshell .
Solution
Because we kno w tha tlcan b e 0, 1, or 2; thus , there are three p ossible subshells . In s tandard nota tion ,
they are la beled the 3 s, 3p, and 3 dsubshells . We ha ve alre ady seen tha t two electrons c an b e in an sstate, and
six in a pstate, but let us use the e qua tion “maximum numb er o f electrons tha t can b e in a subshell
” to c alcula te the maximum numb er in e ach:
The e qua tion “maximum numb er o f electrons tha t can b e in a shell ” giv es the maximum numb er in the
shell to b e
Significanc e
The total numb er o f electrons in the three p ossible subshells is thus the same as the f ormula . In s tandard
(spectrosc opic) nota tion , a fille d shell is denote d as . Shells do not fill in a simple manner .
Before the shell is c ompletely fille d, for e xample , we begin to find electrons in the shell .
The s tructure o f the perio dic ta ble(Figure 8.17 ) can b e unders tood in terms o f shells and subshells , and ,
ultima tely, the total energ y, orbital angular momentum , and spin o f the electrons in the a tom . A detaile d
discus sion o f the p erio dic ta ble is left to a chemis try course —we sk etch only its b asic f eatures here . In this
discus sion , we as sume tha t the a toms are electric ally neutral; tha t is, the y ha ve the same numb er o f electrons
and protons . (Recall tha t the total numb er o f protons in an a tomic nucleus is c alled the a tomic numb er,Z.)
First, the p erio dic ta ble is arrang ed into c olumns and ro ws. The ta ble is re ad left to right and top to b ottom in
the order o f incre asing a tomic numb erZ. Atoms tha t belong to the same c olumn or chemic al group share
man y of the same chemic al prop erties. For e xample , the Li and N a atoms (in the firs t column) b ond to other
atoms in a similar w ay. The firs t row of the ta ble c orresp onds to the 1 s( ) shell o f an a tom .
Consider the h ypothetic al pro cedure o f adding electrons , one b y one , to an a tom . For h ydrog en (H) (upp er left),
the 1 sshell is fille d with either a spin up or do wn electron ( ). This lone electron is e asily share d with
other a toms , so h ydrog en is chemic ally activ e. For helium (He) (upp er right), the 1 sshell is fille d with b oth a
spin up and a spin do wn ( ) electron . This “fills” the 1 sshell , so a helium a tom tends not to share electrons
with other a toms . The helium a tom is said to b e chemic ally inactiv e, iner t, or noble; lik ewise , helium g as is said
to b e an iner t gas or noble g as.
INTER ACTIVE
Build an a tom b y adding and subtracting protons , neutrons , and electrons . Ho w do es the element , charg e, and
mas s chang e? V isitPhET Explora tions: B uild an A tom (https:/ /openstax.org/l/21buildana tom) to explore the
answers to these ques tions .8.4 • The Ex clusion P rinciple and the P eriodic T able 369

Figur e8.17 The periodic table o f elements , sho wing the s tructur e of shel ls and subshel ls.
The sec ond ro w corresp onds to the 2 sand 2 psubshells . For lithium (Li) (upp er left), the 1 sshell is fille d with a
spin-up and spin-do wn electron ( ) and the 2 sshell is fille d with either a spin-up or - down electron ( ).
Its electron c onfigura tion is theref ore or [He]2 s, where [He] indic ates a helium c ore. Lik e hydrog en, the
lone electron in the outermos t shell is e asily share d with other a toms . For b eryllium (Be), the 2 sshell is fille d
with a spin-up and - down electron ( ), and has the electron c onfigura tion [He] .
Next, we look a t the right side o f the ta ble. For b oron (B), the 1 sand 2 sshells are fille d and the 2 p( ) shell
contains either a spin up or do wn electron ( ). From c arbon (C) to neon (N), w e the fill the 2 pshell . The
maximum numb er o f electrons in the 2 pshells is . For neon (N e), the 1 sshell is fille d
with a spin-up and spin-do wn electron ( ), and the 2 pshell is fille d with six electrons ( . This “fills”
the 1 s, 2s, and 2 psubshells , so lik e helium , the neon a tom tends not to share electrons with other a toms .
The pro cess of electron filling rep eats in the third ro w. Ho wever, beginning in the f ourth ro w, the p attern is
brok en. The actual order o f order o f electron filling is giv en b y
1s, 2s, 2p, 3s, 3p, 4s,3d, 4p, 5s,4d, 5p, 6s,4f, 5d, 6p, 7s,...
Notice tha t the 3 d, 4d, 4f, and 5 dsubshells (in b old) are fille d out o f order; this o ccurs b ecause o f interactions
between electrons in the a tom , which so far w e ha ve neglecte d. The transit ion metal sare elements in the g ap
between the firs t two columns and the las t six c olumns tha t contain electrons tha t fill the d( ) subshell . As
expecte d, these a toms are arrang ed in columns . The s tructure o f the p erio dic ta ble c an
be unders tood in terms o f the quantiza tion o f the total energ y (n), orbital angular momentum ( l), and spin ( s).
The firs t two columns c orresp ond to the s ) subshell , the ne xt six c olumns c orresp ond to the p( )
subshell , and the g ap b etween these c olumns c orresp onds to the d( ) subshell .370 8 • A tomic S tructure
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

The p erio dic ta ble also giv es inf orma tion on molecular b onding . To see this , consider a toms in the left -mos t
column (the so -called alkali metals including: Li , Na, and K ). These a toms c ontain a single electron in the 2 s
subshell , which is e asily dona ted to other a toms . In c ontras t, atoms in the sec ond-to -right c olumn (the
halog ens: f or e xample , Cl, F, and Br) are rela tively s ting y in sharing electrons . These a toms w ould much ra ther
accept an electron , because the y are jus t one electron sh y of a fille d shell (“ of being noble ”).
Theref ore, if a N a atom is plac ed in close pro ximity to a Cl a tom , the N a atom freely dona tes its 2 selectron and
the Cl a tom e agerly ac cepts it . In the pro cess, the N a atom (originally a neutral charg e) becomes p ositiv ely
charg ed and the Cl (originally a neutral charg e) becomes neg atively charg ed. Charg ed atoms are c alled ions . In
this c ase, the ions are and , where the sup erscript indic ates charg e of the ion . The electric (C oulomb)
attraction b etween these a toms f orms a N aCl (salt) molecule . A chemic al bond b etween tw o ions is c alled an
ionic b ond . There are man y kinds o f chemic al bonds . For e xample , in an o xygen molecule electrons are
equally share d between the a toms . The b onding o f oxygen a toms is an e xample o f acovalent b ond .
8.5Atomic Spec tra and X -rays
Learning Objectiv es
By the end o f this section, y ou wil l be able t o:
•Describe the absorp tion and emission o f radiation in terms o f atomic ener gy le vels and ener gy dif ferences
•Use quantum number s to es timate the ener gy, frequency , and w avelength o f pho tons pr oduced b y atomic
transitions in multi-elec tron atoms
•Explain r adiation concep ts in the conte xt of atomic fluor escence and X -rays
The s tudy o f atomic sp ectra pro vides mos t of our kno wledge about a toms . In mo dern scienc e, atomic sp ectra
are use d to identif y sp ecies o f atoms in a rang e of objects , from dis tant g alaxies to blo od samples a t a crime
scene.
The theoretic al basis o f atomic sp ectrosc opy is the transition o f electrons b etween energ y lev els in a toms . For
example , if an electron in a h ydrog en a tom mak es a transition from the to the shell , the a tom emits
a photon with a w avelength
where is energ y carrie d away by the photon and . After this radia tion p asses
through a sp ectrometer , it app ears as a sharp sp ectral line on a screen . The Bohr mo del o f this pro cess is
shown in Figure 8.18 . If the electron la ter a bsorbs a photon with energ y , the electron returns to the
shell . (We examine d the Bohr mo del e arlier , inPhotons and Ma tter W aves.)8.368.5 • A tomic Spec tra and X -rays 371

Figur e8.18 An electr on tr ansition fr om the to the shel l of a h ydrogen at om.
To unders tand a tomic transitions in multi-electron a toms , it is nec essary to c onsider man y eff ects , including
the C oulomb repulsion b etween electrons and internal ma gnetic interactions (spin-orbit and spin-spin
couplings). F ortuna tely, man y prop erties o f these s ystems c an b e unders tood by neglecting interactions
between electrons and representing e ach electron b y its o wn single -particle w ave function .
Atomic transitions mus t ob eyselect ion r ules . These r ules f ollow from principles o f quantum mechanics and
symmetr y. Selection r ules clas sify transitions as either allo wed or f orbidden . (Forbidden transitions do o ccur,
but the prob ability o f the typic al forbidden transition is v ery small .) For a h ydrog en-lik e atom , atomic
transitions tha t involve electroma gnetic interactions (the emis sion and a bsorption o f photons) ob ey the
following selection r ule:
where lis as sociated with the ma gnitude o f orbital angular momentum ,
For multi-electron a toms , similar r ules apply . To illus trate this r ule, consider the obser ved atomic transitions
in h ydrog en (H), so dium (N a), and mercur y (Hg ) (Figure 8.19 ). The horiz ontal lines in this dia gram c orresp ond
to atomic energ y lev els, and the transitions allo wed by this selection r ule are sho wn b y lines dra wn b etween
these lev els. The energies o f these s tates are on the order o f a few electron v olts, and photons emit ted in
transitions are in the visible rang e. Technic ally, atomic transitions c an viola te the selection r ule, but such
transitions are unc ommon .8.37
ℏ 8.38372 8 • A tomic S tructure
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Figur e8.19 Ener gy-level diagr ams f or (a) h ydrogen, (b) sodium, and (c) mer cury. For comparison, h ydrogen ener gy levels ar e sho wn in
the sodium diagr am.
The h ydrog en a tom has the simples t energ y-lev el dia gram . If w e neglect electron spin , all s tates with the same
value o fnhave the same total energ y. Ho wever, spin-orbit c oupling splits the states into tw o angular
momentum s tates ( sand p) of slightly diff erent energies . (These lev els are not v ertically displac ed, because the
energ y split ting is to o small to sho w up in this dia gram .) Lik ewise , spin-orbit c oupling splits the states
into three angular momentum s tates ( s,p, and d).8.5 • A tomic Spec tra and X -rays 373

The energ y-lev el dia gram f or h ydrog en is similar to so dium , because b oth a toms ha ve one electron in the outer
shell . The v alenc e electron o f sodium mo ves in the electric field o f a nucleus shielde d by electrons in the inner
shells , so it do es not e xperienc e a simple 1/ rCoulomb p otential and its total energ y dep ends on b oth nand l.
Interes tingly , mercur y has tw o sep arate energ y-lev el dia grams; these dia grams c orresp ond to tw o net spin
states o f its 6 s(valenc e) electrons .
EXAMPLE 8.6
The Sodium Doublet
The sp ectr um o f sodium is analyz ed with a sp ectrometer . Tw o closely sp aced lines with w avelengths 589.00
nm and 589.59 nm are obser ved. (a) If the doublet c orresp onds to the e xcited (valenc e) electron tha t
transitions from some e xcited state do wn to the 3 sstate, wha t was the original electron angular momentum?
(b) Wha t is the energ y diff erenc e between these tw o excited states?
Strategy
Sodium and h ydrog en b elong to the same c olumn or chemic al group o f the p erio dic ta ble, so so dium is
“hydrog en-lik e.” The outermos t electron in so dium is in the 3 s( ) subshell and c an b e excited to higher
energ y lev els. As f or h ydrog en, subse quent transitions to lo wer energ y lev els mus t ob ey the selection r ule:
We mus t firs t determine the quantum numb er o f the initial s tate tha t satisfies the selection r ule. Then , we can
use this numb er to determine the ma gnitude o f orbital angular momentum o f the initial s tate.
Solution
a.Allowed transitions mus t ob ey the selection r ule. If the quantum numb er o f the initial s tate is , the
transition is f orbidden b ecause . If the quantum numb er o f the initial s tate is ,…the
transition is f orbidden b ecause Theref ore, the quantum o f the initial s tate mus t be . The
orbital angular momentum o f the initial s tate is
ℏ ℏ
b.Because the final s tate for b oth transitions is the same (3 s), the diff erenc e in energies o f the photons is
equal to the diff erenc e in energies o f the tw o excited states. Using the e qua tion
we ha ve
Significanc e
To unders tand the difficulty o f me asuring this energ y diff erenc e, we comp are this diff erenc e with the a verage
energ y of the tw o photons emit ted in the transition . Giv en an a verage wavelength o f 589.30 nm , the a verage
energ y of the photons is
The energ y diff erenc e is about 0.1% (1 p art in 1000) o f this a verage energ y. Ho wever, a sensitiv e
spectrometer c an me asure the diff erenc e.374 8 • A tomic S tructure
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Atomic Fluor escence
Fluoresc enc eoccurs when an electron in an a tom is e xcited sev eral s teps a bove the ground s tate by the
absorption o f a high-energ y ultra violet (UV ) photon . Onc e excited, the electron “ de-excites” in tw o ways. The
electron c an drop b ack to the ground s tate, emit ting a photon o f the same energ y tha t excited it, or it c an drop
in a series o f smaller s teps , emit ting sev eral lo w-energ y photons . Some o f these photons ma y be in the visible
rang e. Fluoresc ent dy e in clothes c an mak e colors seem brighter in sunlight b y converting UV radia tion into
visible light . Fluoresc ent lights are more efficient in c onverting electric al energ y into visible light than
incandesc ent filaments (a bout f our times as efficient). Figure 8.20 shows a sc orpion illumina ted by a UV lamp .
Proteins ne ar the sur face of the skin emit a characteris tic blue light .
Figur e8.20 A sc orpion glo ws blue under a UV lamp . (credit: K en Bosma)
X-rays
The s tudy o f atomic energ y transitions ena bles us to unders tand X -rays and X -ray technolog y. Lik e all
electroma gnetic radia tion , X-rays are made o f photons . X-ray photons are pro duced when electrons in the
outermos t shells o f an a tom drop to the inner shells . (Hy drog en a toms do not emit X -rays, because the electron
energ y lev els are to o closely sp aced tog ether to p ermit the emis sion o f high-fre quency radia tion .) Transitions
of this kind are normally f orbidden b ecause the lo wer states are alre ady fille d. Ho wever, if an inner shell has a
vacancy (an inner electron is mis sing , perhaps from b eing kno cked away by a high-sp eed electron), an
electron from one o f the outer shells c an drop in energ y to fill the v acancy . The energ y gap for such a transition
is rela tively larg e, so w avelength o f the radia ted X-ray photon is rela tively shor t.
X-rays can also b e pro duced by bomb arding a metal targ et with high-energ y electrons , as sho wn in Figure
8.21 . In the figure , electrons are b oiled off a filament and ac celera ted by an electric field into a tungs ten targ et.
According to the clas sical theor y of electroma gnetism ,anycharg ed particle tha t accelera tes emits radia tion .
Thus , when the electron s trikes the tungs ten targ et, and suddenly slo ws do wn, the electron emits braking
radiat ion. (Braking radia tion ref ers to radia tion pro duced by an y charg ed particle tha t is slo wed by a me dium .)
In this c ase, braking radia tion c ontains a c ontinuous rang e of fre quencies , because the electrons will c ollide
with the targ et atoms in slightly diff erent w ays.
Braking radia tion is not the only typ e of radia tion pro duced in this interaction . In some c ases , an electron
collides with another inner -shell electron o f a targ et atom , and kno cks the electron out o f the a tom—billiard
ball s tyle. The empty s tate is fille d when an electron in a higher shell drops into the s tate (drop in energ y lev el)
and emits an X -ray photon .8.5 • A tomic Spec tra and X -rays 375

Figur e8.21 A sk etch o f an X -ray tube . X-rays are emit ted fr om the tungs ten tar get.
Historic ally, X-ray sp ectral lines w ere la beled with let ters ( K,L,M,N, …). These let ters c orresp ond to the a tomic
shells ( ). X-rays pro duced by a transition from an y higher shell to the K( ) shell are la beled
asKX-rays. X-rays pro duced in a transition from the L( ) shell are c alled X-rays; X-rays pro duced in a
transition from the M( ) shell are c alled X-rays; X-rays pro duced in a transition from the N( )
shell are c alled X-rays; and so f orth. Transitions from higher shells to Land Mshells are la beled similarly .
These transitions are represente d by an energ y-lev el dia gram in Figure 8.22 .
Figur e8.22 X-ray transitions in an at om.
The dis tribution o f X-ray wavelengths pro duced by striking metal with a b eam o f electrons is giv en in Figure
8.23 . X-ray transitions in the targ et metal app ear as p eaks on top o f the braking radia tion cur ve. Photon
frequencies c orresp onding to the spik es in the X -ray dis tribution are c alled characteris tic fre quencies ,
because the y can b e use d to identif y the targ et metal . The sharp cuto ff wavelength ( just below the peak)
corresp onds to an electron tha t loses all o f its energ y to a single photon . Radia tion o f shor ter w avelengths is
forbidden b y the c onser vation o f energ y.376 8 • A tomic S tructure
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Figur e8.23 X-ray spectrum fr om a sil ver tar get. The peak s correspond t o char acteristic fr equencies o f X-rays emit ted b y silver when
struck b y an electr on beam.
EXAMPLE 8.7
X-Rays from Aluminum
Estima te the characteris tic energ y and fre quency o f the X-ray for aluminum ( ).
Strategy
A X-ray is pro duced by the transition o f an electron in the L( ) shell to the K( ) shell . An electron
in the Lshell “ sees” a charg e because one electron in the Kshell shields the nucle ar charg e.
(Recall, two electrons are not in the Kshell b ecause the other electron s tate is v acant.) The fre quency o f the
emit ted photon c an b e es tima ted from the energ y diff erenc e between the Land Kshells .
Solution
The energ y diff erenc e between the Land Kshells in a h ydrog en a tom is 10.2 e V. Assuming tha t other electrons
in the Lshell or in higher -energ y shells do not shield the nucle ar charg e, the energ y diff erenc e between the L
and Kshells in an a tom with is appro xima tely
Base d on the rela tionship , the fre quency o f the X -ray is
Significanc e
The w avelength o f the typic al X-ray is 0.1–10 nm . In this c ase, the w avelength is:
Henc e, the transition LKin aluminum pro duces X -ray radia tion .
X-ray pro duction pro vides an imp ortant tes t of quantum mechanics . According to the Bohr mo del, the energ y
of a X-ray dep ends on the nucle ar charg e or a tomic numb er,Z. IfZis larg e, Coulomb f orces in the a tom are
larg e, energ y diff erenc es ( ) are larg e, and , theref ore, the energ y of radia ted photons is larg e. To illus trate,
consider a single electron in a multi-electron a tom . Neglecting interactions b etween the electrons , the allo wed
energ y lev els are8.39
8.408.5 • A tomic Spec tra and X -rays 377

where n= 1, 2, …and Zis the a tomic numb er o f the nucleus . Ho wever, an electron in the L( ) shell “ sees” a
charg e , because one electron in the Kshell shields the nucle ar charg e. (Recall tha t there is only one
electron in the Kshell b ecause the other electron w as “kno cked out .”) Theref ore, the appro xima te energies o f
the electron in the Land Kshells are
The energ y carrie d away by a photon in a transition from the Lshell to the Kshell is theref ore
where Zis the a tomic numb er. In g eneral , the X -ray photon energ y for a transition from an outer shell to the K
shell is
or
where fis the fre quency o f a X-ray. This e qua tion is Mosele y’s law. For larg e values o fZ, we ha ve
appro xima tely
This pre diction c an b e check ed by me asuring ffor a v ariety o f metal targ ets. This mo del is supp orted if a plot
ofZversus data (c alled aMosele y plot ) is line ar. Comp arison o f mo del pre dictions and e xperimental
results , for b oth the Kand Lseries , is sho wn in Figure 8.24 . The da ta supp ort the mo del tha t X-rays are
produced when an outer shell electron drops in energ y to fill a v acancy in an inner shell .
CHE CK Y OUR UNDER STANDING 8.3
X-rays are pro duced by bomb arding a metal targ et with high-energ y electrons . If the targ et is replac ed by
another with tw o times the a tomic numb er, wha t happ ens to the fre quency o f X-rays?8.41378 8 • A tomic S tructure
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Figur e8.24 A Mosele y plot. These data w ere adap ted fr om Mosele y’s original data (H. G. J . Mosele y,Philos . Mag . (6) 77:703, 1914).
EXAMPLE 8.8
Char acteristic X -Ray Ener gy
Calcula te the appro xima te energ y of a X-ray from a tungs ten ano de in an X -ray tub e.
Strategy
Two electrons o ccup y a fille dKshell . A v acancy in this shell w ould le ave one electron , so the eff ectiv e charg e
for an electron in the Lshell w ould b eZ− 1 ra ther than Z. For tungs ten, so the eff ectiv e charg e is 73.
This numb er can b e use d to c alcula te the energ y-lev el diff erenc e between the Land Kshells , and , theref ore,
the energ y carrie d away by a photon in the transition
Solution
The eff ectiv eZis 73, so the X-ray energ y is giv en b y
where
and8.5 • A tomic Spec tra and X -rays 379

Thus ,
Significanc e
This larg e photon energ y is typic al of X-rays. X-ray energies b ecome progres sively larg er for he avier elements
because their energ y incre ases appro xima tely as . An ac celera tion v olta ge of more than 50,000 v olts is
needed to “kno ck out ” an inner electron from a tungs ten a tom .
X-ray Technology
X-rays ha ve man y applic ations , such as in me dical dia gnos tics ( Figure 8.25 ), insp ection o f lugg age at airp orts
(Figure 8.26 ), and ev en detection o f cracks in cr ucial aircra ft comp onents . The mos t common X -ray ima ges are
due to shado ws. Bec ause X -ray photons ha ve high energ y, the y penetra te ma terials tha t are op aque to visible
light . The more energ y an X -ray photon has , the more ma terial it p enetra tes. The depth o f penetra tion is
rela ted to the density o f the ma terial , as w ell as to the energ y of the photon . The denser the ma terial , the f ewer
X-ray photons g et through and the dark er the shado w. X-rays are eff ectiv e at identif ying b one bre aks and
tumors; ho wever, overexposure to X -rays can dama ge cells in biologic al org anisms .
Figur e8.25 (a) An X -ray imag e of a person ’s teeth. (b) A typical X -ray machine in a dentis t’s office produc es relativ ely low-ener gy
radiation t o minimiz e patient e xposur e. (credit a: modification o f work b y “Dmitr y G”/Wikimedia Commons)
Figur e8.26 An X -ray imag e of a piec e of lug gage. The denser the mat erial , the dark er the shado w. Object c olors r elate to mat erial
composition—metal lic objects sho w up as blue in this imag e. (credit: “IDuk e”/Wikimedia Commons)
A standard X -ray ima ge pro vides a tw o-dimensional view o f the object . Ho wever, in me dical applic ations , this380 8 • A tomic S tructure
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

view do es not o ften pro vide enough inf orma tion to dra w firm c onclusions . For e xample , in a tw o-dimensional
X-ray ima ge of the b ody, bones c an e asily hide so ft tis sues or org ans. The C AT (compute d axial tomograph y)
scanner addres ses this problem b y collecting numerous X -ray ima ges in “ slices” throughout the b ody.
Comple x computer -ima ge pro cessing o f the rela tive absorption o f the X -rays, in diff erent directions , can
produce a highly detaile d three -dimensional X -ray ima ge of the b ody.
X-rays can also b e use d to prob e the s tructures o f atoms and molecules . Consider X -rays incident on the
surface of a cr ystalline solid . Some X -ray photons reflect a t the sur face, and others reflect o ff the “plane ” of
atoms jus t below the sur face. Inter ferenc e between these photons , for diff erent angles o f incidenc e, pro duces a
beautiful ima ge on a screen ( Figure 8.27 ). The interaction o f X-rays with a solid is c alled X-ray diffraction . The
mos t famous e xample using X -ray diffraction is the disc overy of the double -helix s tructure o f DN A.
Figur e8.27 X-ray diffr action fr om the cr ystal o f a pr otein (hen eg g lysozyme) pr oduc ed this int erference pat tern. Anal ysis o f the pat tern
yields inf ormation about the s tructur e of the pr otein. (cr edit: “Del45”/ Wikimedia Commons)
8.6Laser s
Learning Objectiv es
By the end o f this section, y ou wil l be able t o:
•Describe the phy sical pr ocesses necessar y to pr oduce laser light
•Explain the dif ference be tween coher ent and incoher ent light
•Describe the application o f laser s to a CD and Blu-Ray play er
Alaser is devic e tha t emits c oherent and mono chroma tic light . The light is c oherent if photons tha t comp ose
the light are in-phase , and mono chromat icif the photons ha ve a single fre quency (c olor). When a g as in the
laser a bsorbs radia tion , electrons are elev ated to diff erent energ y lev els. Mos t electrons return imme diately to
the ground s tate, but others ling er in wha t is c alled ametas table s tate . It is p ossible to plac e a majority o f these8.6 • L asers 381

atoms in a metas table s tate, a c ondition c alled apopulat ion in version .
When a photon o f energ y dis turbs an electron in a metas table s tate (Figure 8.28 ), the electron drops to the
lower-energ y lev el and emits an addition photon , and the tw o photons pro ceed off tog ether . This pro cess is
calledstimulate d emis sion . It o ccurs with rela tively high prob ability when the energ y of the inc oming photon
is equal to the energ y diff erenc e between the e xcited and “ de-excited” energ y lev els o f the electron ( ).
Henc e, the inc oming photon and the photon pro duced by de -excitation ha ve the same energ y,hf. These
photons enc ounter more electrons in the metas table s tate, and the pro cess rep eats. The result is a c ascade or
chain re action o f similar de -excitations . Laser light is c oherent b ecause all light w aves in laser light share the
same fre quency (c olor) and the same phase (an y tw o points o f along a line p erpendicular to the direction o f
motion are on the “ same p art” of the w ave”). A schema tic dia gram o f coherent and inc oherent light w ave
pattern is giv en in Figure 8.29 .
Figur e8.28 The ph ysics o f a laser . An incident phot on o f frequency fcauses a cascade o f phot ons o f the same fr equency .
Figur e8.29 A coher ent light w ave pat tern c ontains light w aves o f the same fr equency and phase . An inc oher ent light w ave pat tern
contains light w aves o f diff erent fr equencies and phases .
Lasers are use d in a wide rang e of applic ations , such as in c ommunic ation (optic al fib er phone lines),
enter tainment ( laser light sho ws), me dicine (remo ving tumors and c auterizing v essels in the retina), and in
retail sales ( bar code re aders). Lasers c an also b e pro duced by a larg e rang e of ma terials , including solids (f or
example , the r uby cr ystal), g ases ( helium-g as mixture), and liquids (org anic dy es). R ecently , a laser w as ev en
created using g elatin—an e dible laser! Belo w w e discus s tw o practic al applic ations in detail: CD pla yers and
Blu-Ra y Pla yers.
CD Play er
ACD pla yerreads digital inf orma tion s tore d on a c omp act disc (CD). A CD is 6-inch diameter disc made o f
plas tic tha t contains small “bumps” and “pits” ne ars its sur face to enc ode digital or binar y da ta (Figure 8.30 ).
The bumps and pits app ear along a v ery thin track tha t spirals outw ards from the c enter o f the disc . The width
of the track is smaller than 1/20th the width o f a human hair , and the heights o f the bumps are ev en smaller
yet.382 8 • A tomic S tructure
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Figur e8.30 A compact disc is a plas tic disc that uses bumps near its sur face to enc ode digital inf ormation. The sur face of the disc
contains mul tiple la yers, including a la yer of aluminum and one o f pol ycarbonat e plas tic.
A CD pla yer uses a laser to re ad this digital inf orma tion . Laser light is suite d to this purp ose, because c oherent
light c an b e focuse d onto an incre dibly small sp ot and theref ore dis tinguish b etween bumps and pits in the CD .
After pro cessing b y pla yer comp onents (including a diffraction gra ting , polariz er, and c ollima tor), laser light is
focuse d by a lens onto the CD sur face. Light tha t strikes a bump (“land ”) is merely reflecte d, but light tha t
strikes a “pit ” des tructiv ely inter feres , so no light returns (the details o f this pro cess are not imp ortant to this
discus sion). R eflecte d light is interprete d as a “1” and unreflecte d light is interprete d as a “0. ” The resulting
digital signal is c onverted into an analog signal , and the analog signal is f ed into an amplifier tha t powers a
devic e such as a p air o f he adphones . The laser s ystem o f a CD pla yer is sho wn in Figure 8.31 .
Figur e8.31 A CD pla yer and its laser c omponent.
Blu-Ray Play er
Like a CD pla yer, aBlu-Ra y pla yerreads digital inf orma tion ( video or a udio) s tore d on a disc , and a laser is use d
to rec ord this inf orma tion . The pits on a Blu-Ra y disc are much smaller and more closely p acked tog ether than
for a CD , so much more inf orma tion c an b e store d. As a result , the resolving p ower o f the laser mus t be gre ater.
This is achiev ed using shor t wavelength blue laser light —henc e, the name “Blu-” Ra y. (CDs and
DVDs use re d laser light .) The diff erent pit siz es and pla yer-hardw are c onfigura tions o f a CD , DVD, and Blu-Ra y
player are sho wn in Figure 8.32 . The pit siz es o f a Blu-Ra y disk are more than twic e as small as the pits on a
DVD or CD . Unlik e a CD , a Blu-Ra y disc s tore da ta on a p olycarbonate la yer, which plac es the da ta closer to the
lens and a voids re adability problems . A hard c oating is use d to protect the da ta sinc e it is so close to the
surface.8.6 • L asers 383

Figur e8.32 Comparison o f laser r esolution in a CD , DVD, and Blu-R ay Pla yer.384 8 • A tomic S tructure
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

CHAP TER RE VIEW
Key Terms
angular momentum orbital quantum numb er (l)
quantum numb er as sociated with the orbital
angular momentum o f an electron in a h ydrog en
atom
angular momentum project ion quantum numb er
(m)quantum numb er as sociated with the
z-comp onent o f the orbital angular momentum o f
an electron in a h ydrog en a tom
atomic orbital region in sp ace tha t encloses a
certain p ercenta ge (usually 90%) o f the electron
prob ability
Bohr ma gneton magnetic moment o f an electron ,
equal to or
braking radiat ion radia tion pro duced by targ eting
metal with a high-energ y electron b eam (or
radia tion pro duced by the ac celera tion o f an y
charg ed particle in a ma terial)
chemic al group group o f elements in the same
column o f the p erio dic ta ble tha t possess similar
chemic al prop erties
coherent light light tha t consis ts of photons o f the
same fre quency and phase
covalent b ond chemic al bond f orme d by the
sharing o f electrons b etween tw o atoms
electron c onfigurat ion representa tion o f the s tate
of electrons in an a tom , such as for
lithium
fine s tructure detaile d structure o f atomic sp ectra
produced by spin-orbit c oupling
fluoresc enc eradia tion pro duced by the e xcitation
and subse quent , gradual de -excitation o f an
electron in an a tom
hyperfine s tructure detaile d structure o f atomic
spectra pro duced by spin-orbit c oupling
ionic b ond chemic al bond f orme d by the electric
attraction b etween tw o opp ositely charg ed ions
laser coherent light pro duced by a c ascade o f
electron de -excitations
magnet ic orbital quantum numb er another term
for the angular momentum projection quantum
numb er
magnetogram pictoral representa tion , or map , of
the ma gnetic activity a t the Sun ’s sur face
metas table s tate state in which an electron
“ling ers” in an e xcited state
mono chromat ic light tha t consis ts of photons with
the same fre quencyMosele y plot plot o f the a tomic numb er versus the
square ro ot of X-ray fre quency
Mosele y’s law rela tionship b etween the a tomic
numb er and X -ray photon fre quency f or X -ray
production
orbital ma gnet ic dip ole moment measure o f the
strength o f the ma gnetic field pro duced by the
orbital angular momentum o f the electron
Pauli ’s exclusion principle no tw o electrons in an
atom c an ha ve the same v alues f or all f our
quantum numb ers
populat ion in version condition in which a
majority o f atoms c ontain electrons in a
metas table s tate
princip al quantum numb er (n)quantum numb er
associated with the total energ y of an electron in a
hydrog en a tom
radial prob abilit y densit y funct ion function use
to determine the prob ability o f a electron to b e
found in a sp atial inter val in r
select ion r ules rules tha t determine whether
atomic transitions are allo wed or f orbidden (rare)
spin project ion quantum numb er ( )quantum
numb er as sociated with the z-comp onent o f the
spin angular momentum o f an electron
spin quantum numb er (s)quantum numb er
associated with the spin angular momentum o f
an electron
spin-flip transit ions atomic transitions b etween
states o f an electron-proton s ystem in which the
magnetic moments are aligne d and not aligne d
spin-orbit c oupling interaction b etween the
electron ma gnetic moment and the ma gnetic field
produced by the orbital angular momentum o f
the electron
stimulate d emis sion when a photon o f energ y
trigg ers an electron in a metas table s tate to drop
in energ y emit ting an additional photon
transit ion metal element tha t is lo cated in the g ap
between the firs t two columns and the las t six
columns o f the ta ble o f elements tha t contains
electrons tha t fill the dsubshell
valenc e electron electron in the outer shell o f an
atom tha t particip ates in chemic al bonding
Zeeman eff ect split ting o f energ y lev els b y an
external ma gnetic field8 • Chap ter Re view 385

Key Equations
Orbital angular momentum ℏ
z-comp onent o f orbital angular momentum ℏ
Radial prob ability density function
Spin angular momentum ℏ
z-comp onent o f spin angular momentum ℏ
Electron spin ma gnetic moment
Electron orbital ma gnetic dip ole moment
Potential energ y as sociated with the ma gnetic
interaction b etween the orbital ma gnetic dip ole
moment and an e xternal ma gnetic field
Maximum numb er o f electrons in a subshell o f
a hydrog en a tom
Selection r ule f or a tomic transitions in a
hydrog en-lik e atom
Mosele y’s law for X -ray pro duction
Summar y
8.1The Hy drogen A tom
•A hydrog en a tom c an b e describ ed in terms o f
its w ave function , prob ability density , total
energ y, and orbital angular momentum .
•The s tate of an electron in a h ydrog en a tom is
specifie d by its quantum numb ers ( n,l,m).
•In contras t to the Bohr mo del o f the a tom , the
Schrö ding er mo del mak es pre dictions b ased on
prob ability s tatements .
•The quantum numb ers o f a h ydrog en a tom c an
be use d to c alcula te imp ortant inf orma tion
about the a tom .
8.2Orbital Magne tic Dipole Moment o f the
Electron
•A hydrog en a tom has ma gnetic prop erties
because the motion o f the electron acts as a
current lo op.•The energ y lev els o f a h ydrog en a tom as sociated
with orbital angular momentum are split b y an
external ma gnetic field b ecause the orbital
angular ma gnetic moment interacts with the
field .
•The quantum numb ers o f an electron in a
hydrog en a tom c an b e use d to c alcula te the
magnitude and direction o f the orbital ma gnetic
dipole moment o f the a tom .
8.3Electron Spin
•The s tate of an electron in a h ydrog en a tom c an
be expres sed in terms o f five quantum numb ers.
•The spin angular momentum quantum o f an
electron is = . The spin angular momentum
projection quantum numb er is ms
(spin up or spin do wn).
•The fine and h yperfine s tructures o f the386 8 • Chap ter Re view
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

hydrog en sp ectr um are e xplaine d by ma gnetic
interactions within the a tom .
8.4The Ex clusion P rinciple and the P eriodic
Table
•Pauli’s exclusion principle s tates tha t no tw o
electrons in an a tom c an ha ve all the same
quantum numb ers.
•The s tructure o f the p erio dic ta ble o f elements
can b e explaine d in terms o f the total energ y,
orbital angular momentum , and spin o f
electrons in an a tom .
•The s tate of an a tom c an b e expres sed by its
electron c onfigura tion , which describ es the
shells and subshells tha t are fille d in the a tom .
8.5Atomic Spec tra and X -rays
•Radia tion is a bsorb ed and emit ted by atomic
energ y-lev el transitions .
•Quantum numb ers c an b e use d to es tima te theenerg y, fre quency , and w avelength o f photons
produced by atomic transitions .
•Atomic fluoresc ence occurs when an electron in
an a tom is e xcited sev eral s teps a bove the
ground s tate by the a bsorption o f a high-energ y
ultra violet (UV ) photon .
•X-ray photons are pro duced when a v acancy in
an inner shell o f an a tom is fille d by an electron
from the outer shell o f the a tom .
•The fre quency o f X-ray radia tion is rela ted to the
atomic numb erZof an a tom .
8.6Laser s
•Laser light is c oherent (mono chroma tic and
“phase link ed”) light .
•Laser light is pro duced by popula tion in version
and subse quent de -excitation o f electrons in a
material (solid , liquid , or g as).
•CD and Blu-Ra y pla yers uses lasers to re ad
digital inf orma tion s tore d on discs .
Concep tual Ques tions
8.1The Hy drogen A tom
1.Identif y the ph ysical signific ance of each o f the
quantum numb ers o f the h ydrog en a tom .
2.Describ e the ground s tate of hydrog en in terms o f
wave function , prob ability density , and a tomic
orbitals .
3.Distinguish b etween Bohr ’s and Schrö ding er’s
model o f the h ydrog en a tom . In p articular ,
comp are the energ y and orbital angular
momentum o f the ground s tates.
8.2Orbital Magne tic Dipole Moment o f the
Electron
4.Explain wh y sp ectral lines o f the h ydrog en a tom
are split b y an e xternal ma gnetic field . Wha t
determines the numb er and sp acing o f these
lines?
5.A hydrog en a tom is plac ed in a ma gnetic field .
Which o f the f ollowing quantities are a ffecte d? (a)
total energ y; (b) angular momentum; (c) z -
comp onent o f angular momentum; (d) p olar
angle .
6.On wha t factors do es the orbital ma gnetic dip ole
moment o f an electron dep end?
8.3Electron Spin
7.Explain ho w a h ydrog en a tom in the ground s tate
) can interact ma gnetic ally with an e xternal
magnetic field .8.Comp are orbital angular momentum with spin
angular momentum o f an electron in the
hydrog en a tom .
9.List all the p ossible v alues o fsand for an
electron . Are there p articles f or which these
values are diff erent?
10.Are the angular momentum v ectors and
necessarily aligne d?
11.Wha t is spin-orbit c oupling?
8.4The Ex clusion P rinciple and the P eriodic
Table
12.Wha t is P auli’s exclusion principle? Explain the
imp ortanc e of this principle f or the
unders tanding o f atomic s tructure and
molecular b onding .
13.Comp are the electron c onfigura tions o f the
elements in the same c olumn o f the p erio dic
table.
14.Comp are the electron c onfigura tions o f the
elements tha t belong in the same ro w of the
perio dic ta ble o f elements .
8.5Atomic Spec tra and X -rays
15.Atomic and molecular sp ectra are discrete .
Wha t do es discrete me an, and ho w are discrete
spectra rela ted to the quantiza tion o f energ y
and electron orbits in a toms and molecules?
16.Discus s the pro cess of the a bsorption o f light b y8 • Chap ter Re view 387

matter in terms o f the a tomic s tructure o f the
absorbing me dium .
17.NGC1763 is an emis sion nebula in the Larg e
Magellanic Cloud jus t outside our Milky W ay
Galaxy . Ultra violet light from hot s tars ioniz e
the h ydrog en a toms in the nebula. As protons
and electrons rec ombine , light in the visible
rang e is emit ted. Comp are the energies o f the
photons in volved in these tw o transitions .
18.Why are X -rays emit ted only f or electron
transitions to inner shells? Wha t typ e of photon
is emit ted for transitions b etween outer shells?
19.How do the allo wed orbits f or electrons in a toms
differ from the allo wed orbits f or planets aroundthe sun?
8.6Laser s
20.Distinguish b etween c oherent and
mono chroma tic light .
21.Why is a metas table s tate nec essary for the
production o f laser light?
22.How do es light from an inc andesc ent light bulb
differ from laser light?
23.How is a Blu-Ra y pla yer a ble to re ad more
informa tion tha t a CD pla yer?
24.Wha t are the similarities and diff erenc es
between a CD pla yer and a Blu-Ra y pla yer?
Problems
8.1The Hy drogen A tom
25.The w ave function is ev alua ted at rectangular
coordina tes ( )(2, 1, 1) in arbitrar y units .
Wha t are the spheric al coordina tes o f this
position?
26.If an a tom has an electron in the state
with , wha t are the p ossible v alues o fl?
27.Wha t are the p ossible v alues o fmfor an
electron in the state?
28.Wha t, if an y, constraints do es a v alue o f
plac e on the other quantum numb ers f or an
electron in an a tom?
29.How man y possible s tates are there f or the
state?
30.(a) Ho w man y angles c anLmak e with the z-axis
for an electron? ( b) C alcula te the v alue o f
the smalles t angle .
31.The f orce on an electron is “neg ative the
gradient o f the p otential energ y function .” Use
this kno wledge and Equa tion 8.1 to sho w tha t
the f orce on the electron in a h ydrog en a tom is
given b y Coulomb ’s force law.
32.Wha t is the total numb er o f states with orbital
angular momentum ? (Ignore electron
spin .)
33.The w ave function is ev alua ted at spheric al
coordina tes where
the v alue o f the radial c oordina te is giv en in
arbitrar y units . Wha t are the rectangular
coordina tes o f this p osition?
34.Coulomb ’s force law states tha t the f orce
between tw o charg ed particles is:
Use this e xpres sion to determine the
potential energ y function .
35.Write an e xpres sion f or the total numb er o fstates with orbital angular momentum l.
36.Consider h ydrog en in the ground s tate, . (a)
Use the deriv ative to determine the radial
position f or which the prob ability density ,P(r),
is a maximum .
(b) U se the integral c oncept to determine the
average radial p osition . (This is c alled the
expecta tion v alue o f the electron ’s radial
position .) Expres s your ans wers into terms o f
the Bohr radius ,. Hint: The e xpecta tion v alue
is the jus t average value . (c) Wh y are these
values diff erent?
37.Wha t is the prob ability tha t the 1 selectron o f a
hydrog en a tom is f ound outside the Bohr
radius?
38.How man y polar angles are p ossible f or an
electron in the state?
39.Wha t is the maximum numb er o f orbital
angular momentum electron s tates in the
shell o f a h ydrog en a tom? (Ignore electron spin .)
40.Wha t is the maximum numb er o f orbital
angular momentum electron s tates in the
shell o f a h ydrog en a tom? (Ignore electron spin .)
8.2Orbital Magne tic Dipole Moment o f the
Electron
41.Find the ma gnitude o f the orbital ma gnetic
dipole moment o f the electron in in the 3 pstate.
(Expres s your ans wer in terms o f )
42.A current o f flows through a square -
shap ed wire with 2- cm side lengths . Wha t is the
magnetic moment o f the wire?
43.Estima te the ra tio o f the electron ma gnetic
moment to the muon magnetic moment f or the
same s tate of orbital angular momentum . (Hint:388 8 • Chap ter Re view
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

44.Find the ma gnitude o f the orbital ma gnetic
dipole moment o f the electron in in the 4 dstate.
(Expres s your ans wer in terms o f )
45.For a 3 delectron in an e xternal ma gnetic field
of , find (a) the current
associated with the orbital angular momentum ,
and ( b) the maximum torque .
46.An electron in a h ydrog en a tom is in the ,
state. Find the smalles t angle the ma gnetic
moment mak es with the z-axis . (Expres s your
answer in terms o f )
47.Find the minimum torque ma gnitude | tha t
acts on the orbital ma gnetic dip ole o f a 3 p
electron in an e xternal ma gnetic field o f
.
48.An electron in a h ydrog en a tom is in 3 pstate.
Find the smalles t angle the ma gnetic moment
mak es with the z-axis . (Expres s your ans wer in
terms o f )
49.Sho w tha t .
(Hint : An infinitesimal amount o f work is done
to align the ma gnetic moment with the e xternal
field . This w ork rota tes the ma gnetic moment
vector through an angle (toward the
positiv ez-direction), where is a p ositiv e
angle chang e.)
8.3Electron Spin
50.Wha t is the ma gnitude o f the spin momentum
of an electron? (Expres s you ans wer in terms o f
ℏ
51.Wha t are the p ossible p olar orienta tions o f the
spin momentum v ector f or an electron?
52.For write all the p ossible sets o f quantum
numb ers ( n,l,m, ).
53.A hydrog en a tom is plac ed in an e xternal
unif orm ma gnetic field ( ). Calcula te
the w avelength o f light pro duced in a transition
from a spin up to spin do wn s tate.
54.If the ma gnetic field in the prec eding problem is
quadr uple d, wha t happ ens to the w avelength o f
light pro duced in a transition from a spin up to
spin do wn s tate?
55.If the ma gnetic moment in the prec eding
problem is double d, wha t happ ens to the
frequency o f light pro duced in a transition from
a spin-up to spin-do wn s tate?
56.For , write all the p ossible sets o f quantum
numb ers ( n,l,m, ).8.4The Ex clusion P rinciple and the P eriodic
Table
57.(a) Ho w man y electrons c an b e in the
shell?
(b) Wha t are its subshells , and ho w man y
electrons c an b e in e ach?
58.(a) Wha t is the minimum v alue o flfor a subshell
that contains 11 electrons?
(b) If this subshell is in the shell , wha t is
the sp ectrosc opic nota tion f or this a tom?
59.Unre asonable result .Which o f the f ollowing
spectrosc opic nota tions are not allo wed? (a)
(b) (c) (d) (e) . Sta te which r ule
is viola ted for e ach nota tion tha t is not allo wed.
60.Write the electron c onfigura tion f or p otas sium .
61.Write the electron c onfigura tion f or iron .
62.The v alenc e electron o f potas sium is e xcited to a
5dstate. (a) Wha t is the ma gnitude o f the
electron ’s orbital angular momentum? ( b) Ho w
man y states are p ossible along a chosen
direction?
63.(a) If one subshell o f an a tom has nine electrons
in it , wha t is the minimum v alue o fl? (b) Wha t is
the sp ectrosc opic nota tion f or this a tom , if this
subshell is p art of the shell?
64.Write the electron c onfigura tion f or
magnesium .
65.Write the electron c onfigura tion f or c arbon.
66.The ma gnitudes o f the resultant spins o f the
electrons o f the elements B through N e when in
the ground s tate are: ℏ ℏ,
ℏ ℏ, ℏ and 0, resp ectiv ely.
Argue tha t these spins are c onsis tent with
Hund ’s rule.
8.5Atomic Spec tra and X -rays
67.Wha t is the minimum fre quency o f a photon
require d to ioniz e: (a) a ion in its ground
state? ( b) A ion in its firs t excited state?
68.The ion mak es an a tomic transition from
an state to an state. (a) Wha t is the
energ y of the photon emit ted during the
transition? ( b) Wha t is the w avelength o f the
photon?
69.The re d light emit ted by a r uby laser has a
wavelength o f 694.3 nm . Wha t is the diff erenc e
in energ y between the initial s tate and final
state corresp onding to the emis sion o f the light?
70.The y ellow light from a so dium-v apor street
lamp is pro duced by a transition o f sodium
atoms from a 3 pstate to a 3sstate. If the8 • Chap ter Re view 389

differenc e in energies o f those tw o states is 2.10
eV, wha t is the w avelength o f the y ellow light?
71.Estima te the w avelength o f the X-ray from
calcium .
72.Estima te the fre quency o f the X-ray from
cesium .
73.X-rays are pro duced by striking a targ et with a
beam o f electrons . Prior to s triking the targ et,
the electrons are ac celera ted by an electric field
through a p otential energ y diff erenc e:
where eis the charg e of an electron and is
the v olta ge diff erenc e. If volts,
wha t is the minimum w avelength o f the emit ted
radia tion?
74.For the prec eding problem , wha t happ ens to the
minimum w avelength if the v olta ge acros s the
X-ray tub e is double d?
75.Supp ose the e xperiment in the prec eding
problem is c onducte d with muons . Wha t
happ ens to the minimum w avelength?
76.An X -ray tub e ac celera tes an electron with an
applie d volta ge of 50 k V to ward a metal targ et.
(a) Wha t is the shor test-wavelength X -ray
radia tion g enera ted at the targ et? ( b) C alcula te
the photon energ y in e V. (c) Explain the
rela tionship o f the photon energ y to the applie d
volta ge.
77.A color television tub e genera tes some X -rays
when its electron b eam s trikes the screen . Wha t
is the shor test wavelength o f these X -rays, if a
30.0-k V potential is use d to ac celera te the
electrons? (N ote tha t TVs ha ve shielding to
prev ent these X -rays from e xposing view ers.)
78.An X -ray tub e has an applie d volta ge of 100 k V.
(a) Wha t is the mos t energ etic X -ray photon it
can pro duce? Expres s your ans wer in electron
volts and joules . (b) F ind the w avelength o f such
an X -ray.
79.The maximum characteris tic X -ray photonenerg y comes from the c apture o f a free
electron into a Kshell v acancy . Wha t is this
photon energ y in k eV for tungs ten, assuming
that the free electron has no initial kinetic
energ y?
80.Wha t are the appro xima te energies o f the
and X-rays for c opp er?
81.Comp are the X -ray photon w avelengths f or
copp er and g old.
82.The appro xima te energies o f the and X-
rays for c opp er are and
resp ectiv ely. Determine the
ratio o f X-ray fre quencies o f gold to c opp er, then
use this v alue to es tima te the c orresp onding
energies o f and X-rays for g old.
8.6Laser s
83.A carbon dio xide laser use d in surg ery emits
infrare d radia tion with a w avelength o f .
In 1.00 ms , this laser raise d the temp erature o f
of flesh to and ev aporated it. (a)
How man y photons w ere re quire d? Y ou ma y
assume tha t flesh has the same he at of
vaporiza tion as w ater. (b) Wha t was the
minimum p ower output during the flash?
84.An e xcimer laser use d for vision c orrection
emits UV radia tion with a w avelength o f 193
nm. (a) C alcula te the photon energ y in e V. (b)
These photons are use d to ev aporate corne al
tissue, which is v ery similar to w ater in its
prop erties. Calcula te the amount o f energ y
needed per molecule o f water to mak e the phase
chang e from liquid to g as. Tha t is, divide the
heat of vaporiza tion in k J/kg by the numb er o f
water molecules in a kilogram . (c) C onvert this
to eV and c omp are to the photon energ y.
Discus s the implic ations .
Additional P roblems
85.For a h ydrog en a tom in an e xcited state with
princip al quantum numb ern, sho w tha t the
smalles t angle tha t the orbital angular
momentum v ector c an mak e with resp ect to the
z-axis is
86.Wha t is the prob ability tha t the 1 selectron o f a
hydrog en a tom is f ound b etween and
∞87.Sketch the p otential energ y function o f an
electron in a h ydrog en a tom . (a) Wha t is the
value o f this function a t ? in the limit tha t
∞? (b) Wha t is unre asona ble or inc onsis tent
with the f ormer result?
88.Find the v alue o f, the orbital angular
momentum quantum numb er, for the Mo on
around Ear th.390 8 • Chap ter Re view
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

89.Sho w tha t the maximum numb er o f orbital
angular momentum electron s tates in the nth
shell o f an a tom is . (Ignore electron spin .)
(Hint: Mak e a ta ble o f the total numb er o f orbital
angular momentum s tates f or e ach shell and
find the p attern .)
90.Wha t is the ma gnitude o f an electron ma gnetic
moment?
91.Wha t is the maximum numb er o f electron s tates
in the shell?
92.A ground-s tate hydrog en a tom is plac ed in a
unif orm ma gnetic field , and a photon is emit ted
in the transition from a spin-up to spin-do wn
state. The w avelength o f the photon is .
Wha t is the s trength o f the ma gnetic field?
93.Sho w tha t the maximum numb er o f electron
states in the nth shell o f an a tom is .
94.The v alenc e electron o f chlorine is e xcited to a
3pstate. (a) Wha t is the ma gnitude o f the
electron ’s orbital angular momentum? ( b) Wha t
are p ossible v alues f or the z-comp onent o f
angular me asurement?
95.Which o f the f ollowing nota tions are allo wed
(tha t is, which viola te none o f the r ules
regarding v alues o f quantum numb ers)? (a)
(b) (c) (d) (e)
96.The ion mak es an a tomic transition from
an state to an state. (a) Wha t is the
energ y of the photon emit ted during the
transition? ( b) Wha t is the w avelength o f the
photon?97.The maximum characteris tic X -ray photon
energ y comes from the c apture o f a free
electron into a Kshell v acancy . Wha t is this
photon fre quency f or tungs ten, assuming tha t
the free electron has no initial kinetic energ y?
98.Deriv e an e xpres sion f or the ra tio o f X-ray
photon fre quency f or tw o elements with a tomic
numb ers and
99.Comp are the X -ray photon w avelengths f or
copp er and silv er.
100 .(a) Wha t volta ge mus t be applie d to an X -ray
tube to obtain 0.0100- fm-w avelength X -rays
for use in e xploring the details o f nuclei? ( b)
Wha t is unre asona ble a bout this result? (c)
Which as sumptions are unre asona ble or
inconsis tent?
101 .A student in a ph ysics la boratory obser ves a
hydrog en sp ectr um with a diffraction gra ting
for the purp ose o f me asuring the w avelengths
of the emit ted radia tion . In the sp ectr um, she
obser ves a y ellow line and finds its w avelength
to b e 589 nm . (a) As suming tha t this is p art of
the Balmer series , determine the princip al
quantum numb er o f the initial s tate. (b) Wha t
is unre asona ble a bout this result? (c) Which
assumptions are unre asona ble or
inconsis tent?8 • Chap ter Re view 391

392 8 • Chap ter Re view
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

INTR ODUCTIONCHAP TER 9
Condensed Mat ter Ph ysics
9.1Types o f Molecular Bonds
9.2Molecular Spec tra
9.3Bonding in Cr ystalline Solids
9.4Free Elec tron Model o f Metals
9.5Band Theor y of Solids
9.6Semiconduc tors and Doping
9.7Semiconduc tor De vices
9.8Super conduc tivity
In this chapter , we examine applic ations o f quantum mechanics to more c omple x systems ,
such as molecules , metals , semic onductors , and sup erconductors . We review and dev elop c oncepts o f the
previous chapters , including w ave functions , orbitals , and quantum s tates. We also intro duce man y new
concepts , including c ovalent b onding , rota tional energ y lev els, Fermi energ y, energ y bands , doping , and
Cooper p airs .
The main topic in this chapter is the cr ystal s tructure o f solids . For c enturies , crystalline solids ha ve been
priz ed for their b eauty, including g ems lik e diamonds and emeralds , as w ell as g eologic al cr ystals o f quar tz
and metallic ores . But the cr ystalline s tructures o f semic onductors such as silic on ha ve also made p ossible the
electronics indus try of today. In this chapter , we study ho w the s tructures o f solids giv e them prop erties from
strength and transp arency to electric al conductivity .
Figur e9.1 The cr ystalline s tructur e of quar tz al lows it t o clea ve int o smooth planes that r efract light, making it
suitable f or je welry. Silic on, the main element in quar tz, also f orms cr ystals in its pur e form, and these cr ystals f orm
the basis f or the w orldwide semic onduct or electr onics indus try. (credit left: modification o f work b y the Unit ed
Stat es Geological Sur vey)
Chap ter Outline

9.1Types o f Molecular Bonds
Learning Objectiv es
By the end o f this section, y ou wil l be able t o:
•Distinguish be tween the dif ferent t ypes o f molecular bonds
•Determine the dissociation ener gy o f a molecule using the concep ts ioniz ation ener gy, elec tron af finity, and
Coulomb f orce
•Describe co valent bonding in terms o f exchange s ymme try
•Explain the phy sical s tructure of a molecule in terms o f the concep t of hybridiz ation
Quantum mechanics has b een e xtraordinarily suc cessful a t explaining the s tructure and b onding in
molecules , and is theref ore the f ounda tion f or all o f chemis try. Quantum chemis try, as it is sometimes c alled,
explains such b asic ques tions as wh y molecules e xist, wh y the b onding angle b etween h ydrog en a toms in
this molecule is precisely , and wh y these molecules bind tog ether to f orm liquid w ater a t room
temp erature . Applying quantum mechanics to molecules c an b e very difficult ma thema tically, so our
discus sion will b e qualita tive only .
As w e study molecules and then solids , we will use man y diff erent scientific mo dels . In some c ases , we look a t
a molecule or cr ystal as a set o f point nuclei with electrons whizzing around the outside in w ell-define d
trajectories , as in the Bohr mo del. In other c ases , we emplo y our full kno wledge of quantum mechanics to
study these s ystems using w ave functions and the c oncept o f electron spin . It is imp ortant to rememb er tha t
we study mo dern ph ysics with mo dels , and tha t diff erent mo dels are useful f or diff erent purp oses . We do not
always use the mos t powerful mo del, when a les s-powerful, easier -to-use mo del will do the job .
Types o f Bonds
Chemic al units f orm b y man y diff erent kinds o f chemic al bonds . An ionic b ond forms when an electron
trans fers from one a tom to another . Acovalent b ond occurs when tw o or more a toms share electrons . Avan
der W aals b ond occurs due to the a ttraction o f charg e-polariz ed molecules and is c onsidera bly w eaker than
ionic or c ovalent b onds . Man y other typ es o f bonding e xist as w ell. Often , bonding o ccurs via more than one
mechanism . The f ocus o f this section is ionic and c ovalent b onding .
Ionic bonds
The ionic b ond is p erhaps the e asies t typ e of bonding to unders tand . It e xplains the f orma tion o f salt
comp ounds , such as so dium chloride , NaCl. The so dium a tom (s ymb ol N a) has the same electron arrang ement
as a neon a tom plus one 3 selectron . Only 5.14 e V of energ y is re quire d to remo ve this one electron from the
sodium a tom . Theref ore, Na can e asily giv e up or dona te this electron to an adjac ent (ne arby) atom , attaining a
more s table arrang ement o f electrons . Chlorine (s ymb ol Cl) re quires jus t one electron to c omplete its v alenc e
shell , so it re adily ac cepts this electron if it is ne ar the so dium a tom . We theref ore sa y tha t chlorine has a larg e
electron affinit y, which is the energ y as sociated with an ac cepte d electron . The energ y giv en up b y the
chlorine a tom in this pro cess is 3.62 e V. After the electron trans fers from the so dium a tom to the chlorine
atom , the so dium a tom b ecomes a p ositiv e ion and the chlorine a tom b ecomes a neg ative ion . The total energ y
require d for this trans fer is giv en b y
The p ositiv e so dium ion and neg ative chloride ion e xperienc e an a ttractiv e Coulomb f orce. The p otential
energ y as sociated with this f orce is giv en b y
where and is the dis tanc e between the ions .
As the so dium and chloride ions mo ve tog ether (“ desc end the p otential energ y hill ”), the f orce of attraction
between the ions b ecomes s trong er. Ho wever, if the ions b ecome to o close , core-electron w ave functions in the
two ions b egin to o verlap . Due to the e xclusion principle , this action promotes the c ore electrons —and9.1394 9 • C ondensed Mat ter Phy sics
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

theref ore the entire molecule —into a higher energ y state. The equilibrium sep arat ion dis tanc e(orbond
length ) between the ions o ccurs when the molecule is in its lo west energ y state. For dia tomic N aCl, this
distanc e is 0.236 nm .Figure 9.2 shows the total energ y of NaCl as a function o f the dis tanc e of sep aration
between ions .
Figur e9.2 Graph o f ener gy versus ionic separ ation f or sodium chloride . Equilibrium separ ation oc cur when the t otal ener gy is a minimum
.
The total energ y re quire d to f orm a single salt unit is
where is the energ y as sociated with the repulsion b etween c ore electrons due to P auli’s exclusion
principle . The v alue o f mus t be neg ative for the b ond to f orm sp ontaneously . The dissociat ion ener gyis
define d as the energ y re quire d to sep arate the unit into its c onstituent ions , writ ten
Every dia tomic f ormula unit has its o wn characteris tic dis sociation energ y and e quilibrium sep aration length .
Sample v alues are giv en in Table 9.1 .
Molecule Dissociation Ener gy Equilibrium Separ ation9.2
9.39.1 • T ypes o f Molecular Bonds 395

Molecule Dissociation Ener gy Equilibrium Separ ation
Table 9.1Bond Length
EXAMPLE 9.1
The Ener gy of Sal t
Wha t is the dis sociation energ y of a salt f ormula unit (N aCl)?
Strategy
Sodium chloride (N aCl) is a salt f orme d by ionic b onds . The energ y chang e as sociated with this b ond dep ends
on three main pro cesses: the ioniza tion o f Na; the ac ceptanc e of the electron from a N a atom b y a Cl a tom; and
Coulomb a ttraction o f the resulting ions ( ). If the ions g et to o close , the y rep el due to the e xclusion
principle (0.32 e V). The e quilibrium sep aration dis tanc e is
Solution
The energ y chang e as sociated with the trans fer o f an electron from N a to Cl is 1.52 e V, as discus sed earlier in
this section . At equilibrium sep aration , the a toms are apart. The electros tatic p otential energ y
of the a toms is
The total energ y diff erenc e as sociated with the f orma tion o f a N aCl f ormula unit is
Theref ore, the dis sociated energ y of NaCl is 4.26 e V.
Significanc e
The f orma tion o f a N aCl f ormula unit b y ionic b onding is energ etically fa vorable. The dis sociation energ y, or
energ y re quire d to sep arate the N aCl unit into ions is 4.26 e V, consis tent with Figure 9.2 .396 9 • C ondensed Mat ter Phy sics
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

CHE CK Y OUR UNDER STANDING 9.1
Why is the p otential energ y as sociated with the e xclusion principle p ositiv e in Example 9.1 ?
For a so dium ion in an ionic N aCl cr ystal, the e xpres sion f or C oulomb p otential energ y mus t be mo difie d
by a factor kno wn as the Madelung c ons tant . This factor tak es into ac count the interaction o f the so dium ion
with all ne arby chloride and so dium ions . The Madelung c onstant f or a N aCl cr ystal is a bout 1.75. This v alue
implies an e quilibrium sep aration dis tanc e between ions o f 0.280 nm—slightly larg er than f or
diatomic N aCl. We will return to this p oint a gain la ter.
Covalent bonds
In an ionic b ond , an electron trans fers from one a tom to another . Ho wever, in a c ovalent b ond , an electron is
share d between tw o atoms . The ionic b onding mechanism c annot e xplain the e xistenc e of such molecules as
and C O, sinc e no sep aration dis tanc e exists for which the neg ative potential energ y of attraction is
greater in ma gnitude than the energ y nee ded to cre ate ions . Unders tanding precisely ho w such molecules are
covalently b onde d relies on a deep er unders tanding o f quantum mechanics tha t goes b eyond the c overage of
this b ook, but w e will qualita tively describ e the mechanisms in the f ollowing section .
Covalent b onds c an b e unders tood using the simple e xample o f a molecule , which c onsis ts of one electron
in the electric field o f two protons . This s ystem c an b e mo dele d by an electron in a double square w ell (Figure
9.3). The electron is e qually lik ely to b e found in e ach w ell, so the w ave function is either s ymmetric or
antis ymmetric a bout a p oint midw ay between the w ells.
Figur e9.3 A one -dimensional model o f covalent bonding in a molecule . (a) The s ymmetric w ave function o f the electr on shar ed b y
the tw o positiv ely char ged pr otons (r epresent ed b y the tw o finit e squar e wells). (b) The c orresponding antis ymmetric w ave function.
Now ima gine tha t the tw o wells are sep arated by a larg e dis tanc e. In the ground s tate, the w ave function e xists
in one o f two possible s tates: either a single p ositiv e peak (a sine w ave-like “hump ”) in b oth w ells (s ymmetric
case), or a p ositiv e peak in one w ell and a neg ative peak in the other (antis ymmetric c ase). These s tates ha ve
the same energ y. Ho wever, when the w ells are brought tog ether , the s ymmetric w ave function b ecomes the
ground s tate and the antis ymmetric s tate becomes the firs t excited state—in other w ords , the energ y lev el of
the electron is split . Notice, the sp ace-symmetric s tate becomes the energ etically fa vorable ( lower energ y)
state.
The same analy sis is appropria te for an electron b ound to tw o hydrog en a toms . Here , the shap es o f the ground-
state w ave functions ha ve the f orm or in one dimension . The energ etically fa vorable, space-
symmetric s tate implies a high charg e density midw ay between the protons where the electrons are lik ely to
pull the p ositiv ely charg ed protons tog ether .
If a sec ond electron is adde d to this s ystem to f orm a molecule , the w ave function mus t describ e both
particles , including their sp atial rela tionship and rela tive spins . This w ave function mus t also resp ect the
indis tinguisha bility o f electrons . (“If y ou’ve seen one electron , you’ve seen them all .”) In p articular , switching
or e xchanging the electrons should not produce an obser vable eff ect, a prop erty calledexchang e symmetr y.
Exchang e symmetr y can b esymmetric , pro ducing no chang e in the w ave function , orantis ymmetric ,
producing an o verall chang e in the sign o f the w ave function—neither o f which is obser vable.
As w e discus s later, the total w ave function o f two electrons mus t be antis ymmetric on e xchang e. For e xample ,9.1 • T ypes o f Molecular Bonds 397

two electrons b ound to a h ydrog en molecule c an b e in a sp ace-symmetric s tate with antip arallel spins or
space-antis ymmetric s tate with p arallel spins . The s tate with antip arallel spins is energ etically fa vorable
and theref ore use d in c ovalent b onding . If the protons are dra wn to o closely tog ether , however, repulsion
between the protons b ecomes imp ortant . (In other molecules , this eff ect is supplie d by the e xclusion
principle .) As a result , reaches an e quilibrium sep aration o f about 0.074 nm with a binding energ y is 4.52
eV.
INTER ACTIVE
Visit this PBS Le arning Me diatutorial and interactiv e simula tion (https:/ /openstax.org/l/21c ovalentb ond) to
explore the a ttractiv e and repulsiv e forces tha t act on a tomic p articles and c ovalent b onding in a molecule .
Quantum mechanics e xcludes man y typ es o f molecules . For e xample , the molecule does not f orm , because
if a third H a tom appro aches dia tomic h ydrog en, the w ave function o f the electron in this a tom o verlaps the
electrons in the other tw o atoms . If all three electrons are in the ground s tates o f their resp ectiv e atoms , one
pair o f electrons shares all the same quantum numb ers, which is f orbidden b y the e xclusion principle . Ins tead,
one o f the electrons is f orced into a higher energ y state. No sep aration b etween three protons e xists for which
the total energ y chang e of this pro cess is neg ative—tha t is, where b onding o ccurs sp ontaneously . Similarly ,
is not c ovalently b onde d under normal c onditions , because these a toms ha ve no v alenc e electrons to
share . As the a toms are brought tog ether , the w ave functions o f the c ore electrons o verlap , and due to the
exclusion principle , the electrons are f orced into a higher energ y state. No sep aration e xists for which such a
molecule is energ etically fa vorable.
Bonding in P olyatomic Molecules
Apolyatomic molecule is a molecule made o f more than tw o atoms . Examples rang e from a simple w ater
molecule to a c omple x protein molecule . The s tructures o f these molecules c an o ften b e unders tood in terms
of covalent b onding and hybridizat ion. Hybridiza tion is a chang e in the energ y structure o f an a tom in which
mix ed states (s tates tha t can b e writ ten as a line ar sup erposition o f others) p articip ate in b onding .
To illus trate hybridiza tion , consider the b onding in a simple w ater molecule , The electron c onfigura tion
of oxygen is The 1 sand 2 selectrons are in “ close d shells” and do not p articip ate in b onding . The
remaining f our electrons are the v alenc e electrons . These electrons c an fill six p ossible s tates ( , ,
, plus spin up and do wn). The energies o f these s tates are the same , so the o xygen a tom c an e xploit an y
line ar combina tion o f these s tates in b onding with the h ydrog en a toms . These line ar combina tions ( which y ou
learne d about in the chapter on a tomic s tructure) are c alled atomic orbitals , and the y are denote d by
and The electron charg e dis tributions f or these orbitals are giv en in Figure 9.4 .
Figur e9.4 Oxygen has f our v alenc e electr ons. In the c ontext of a w ater molecule , two valenc e electr ons fil l the orbital and one
electr on fil ls each o f the and orbitals . The and orbitals ar e used in bonding with h ydrogen at oms t o form . Without
repulsion o f H at oms , the bond angle betw een h ydrogen at oms w ould be 90 degr ees.
The trans forma tion o f the electron w ave functions o f oxygen to and orbitals in the presenc e of the
hydrog en a toms is an e xample o f hybridiza tion . Tw o electrons are f ound in the orbital with p aire d spins
. One electron is f ound in e ach o f the and orbitals , with unp aire d spins . The la tter orbitals p articip ate
in b onding with the h ydrog en a toms . Base d on Figure 9.4 , we expect the b onding angle f or to b e .398 9 • C ondensed Mat ter Phy sics
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

However, if w e include the eff ects o f repulsion b etween a toms , the b ond angle is . The same arguments
can b e use d to unders tand the tetrahe dral shap e of methane and other molecules .
9.2Molecular Spec tra
Learning Objectiv es
By the end o f this section, y ou wil l be able t o:
•Use the concep ts of vibr ational and r otational ener gy to describe ener gy tr ansitions in a diatomic molecule
•Explain k ey featur es of a vibr ational-r otational ener gy spec trum o f a diatomic molecule
•Estimate allo wed ener gies o f a rotating molecule
•Determine the equilibrium separ ation dis tance be tween atoms in a diatomic molecule fr om the vibr ational-
rotational absorp tion spec trum
Molecular energ y lev els are more c omplic ated than a tomic energ y lev els b ecause molecules c an also vibra te
and rota te. The energies as sociated with such motions lie in diff erent rang es and c an theref ore b e studie d
separately. Electronic transitions are o f order 1 e V, vibra tional transitions are o f order and rota tional
transitions are o f order For c omple x molecules , these energ y chang es are difficult to characteriz e, so
we begin with the simple c ase o f a dia tomic molecule .
According to clas sical mechanics , the energ y of rota tion o f a dia tomic molecule is giv en b y
where Iis the moment o f iner tia and Lis the angular momentum . According to quantum mechanics , the
rota tional angular momentum is quantiz ed:
where lis the orbital angular quantum numb er. The allo wedrotat ional ener gy levelof a dia tomic molecule is
theref ore
where the characteris tic rota tional energ y of a molecule is define d as
For a dia tomic molecule , the moment o f iner tia with re duced mas sis
where is the total dis tanc e between the a toms . The energ y diff erenc e between rota tional lev els is theref ore
A detaile d study o f transitions b etween rota tional energ y lev els brought a bout b y the a bsorption or emis sion o f
radia tion (a so -calledelectric dip ole transit ion) requires tha t
This r ule, kno wn as a select ion r ule, limits the p ossible transitions from one quantum s tate to another .
Equa tion 9.10 is the selection r ule f or rota tional energ y transitions . It applies only to dia tomic molecules tha t
have an electric dip ole moment . For this re ason , symmetric molecules such as and do not e xperienc e
rota tional energ y transitions due to the a bsorption or emis sion o f electroma gnetic radia tion .9.4
ℏ 9.5
ℏ9.6
ℏ9.7
9.8
9.9
9.109.2 • Molecular Spec tra 399

EXAMPLE 9.2
The R otational Ener gy of HCl
Determine the lo west three rota tional energ y lev els o f a h ydrog en chloride (HCl) molecule .
Strategy
Hydrog en chloride (HCl) is a dia tomic molecule with an e quilibrium sep aration dis tanc e of 0.127 nm .
Rotational energ y lev els dep end only on the momentum o f iner tiaIand the orbital angular momentum
quantum numb erl(in this c ase, , 1, and 2). The momentum o f iner tia dep ends , in turn , on the
equilibrium sep aration dis tanc e (which is giv en) and the re duced mas s, which dep ends on the mas ses o f the H
and Cl a toms .
Solution
First, we compute the re duced mas s. If P article 1 is h ydrog en and P article 2 is chloride , we ha ve
The c orresp onding res t mas s energ y is theref ore
This allo ws us to c alcula te the characteris tic energ y:
ℏ ℏ ℏ
(Notice ho w this e xpres sion is writ ten in terms o f the res t mas s energ y. This technique is c ommon in mo dern
physics c alcula tions .) The rota tional energ y lev els are giv en b y
ℏ
where lis the orbital quantum numb er. The three lo west rota tional energ y lev els o f an HCl molecule are
theref ore
Significanc e
The rota tional sp ectr um is as sociated with w eak transitions (1/1000 to 1/100 o f an e V). By comp arison , the
energ y of an electron in the ground s tate of hydrog en is .
CHE CK Y OUR UNDER STANDING 9.2
Wha t do es the energ y sep aration b etween a bsorption lines in a rota tional sp ectr um o f a dia tomic molecule tell
you?
The vibrat ional ener gy level, which is the energ y lev el as sociated with the vibra tional energ y of a molecule , is
more difficult to es tima te than the rota tional energ y lev el. Ho wever, we can es tima te these lev els b y as suming
that the tw o atoms in the dia tomic molecule are c onnecte d by an ide al spring o f spring c onstant k. The
potential energ y of this spring s ystem is400 9 • C ondensed Mat ter Phy sics
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Where is a chang e in the “na tural length ” of the molecule along a line tha t connects the a toms . Solving
Schrö ding er’s equa tion f or this p otential giv es
Where is the na tural angular fre quency o f vibra tion and nis the vibra tional quantum numb er. The
prediction tha t vibra tional energ y lev els are ev enly sp aced ℏ turns out to b e good at lower energies .
A detaile d study o f transitions b etween vibra tional energ y lev els induc ed by the a bsorption or emis sion o f
radia tion (and the sp ecific ally so -called electric dip ole transition) re quires tha t
Equa tion 9.13 represents the selection r ule f or vibra tional energ y transitions . As mentione d before, this r ule
applies only to dia tomic molecules tha t ha ve an electric dip ole moment . Symmetric molecules do not
experienc e such transitions .
Due to the selection r ules , the a bsorption or emis sion o f radia tion b y a dia tomic molecule in volves a transition
in vibra tional and rota tional s tates. Specific ally, if the vibra tional quantum numb er (n) chang es b y one unit ,
then the rota tional quantum numb er (l) chang es b y one unit . An energ y-lev el dia gram o f a p ossible transition
is giv en in Figure 9.5 . The a bsorption sp ectr um f or such transitions in h ydrog en chloride (HCl) is sho wn in
Figure 9.6 . The a bsorption p eaks are due to transitions from the to vibra tional s tates. Energ y
differenc es for the b and o f peaks a t the left and right are , resp ectiv ely,
ℏ ℏ ℏ ℏ and
ℏ ℏ ℏ ℏ
The moment o f iner tia c an then b e determine d from the energ y sp acing b etween individual p eaks or
from the g ap b etween the left and right b ands . The fre quency a t the c enter o f this g ap is the fre quency
of vibra tion .
Figur e9.5 Three types o f ener gy levels in a diat omic molecule: electr onic, vibr ational , and r otational . If the vibr ational quantum number
(n) chang es b y one unit, then the r otational quantum number ( l) chang es b y one unit.9.11
ℏ 9.12
9.139.2 • Molecular Spec tra 401

Figur e9.6 Absorp tion spectrum o f hydrogen chloride (HCl) fr om the vibrational le vels. The discr ete peak s indicat e a
quantization o f the ang ular momentum o f the molecule . The bands t o the left indicat e a decr ease in ang ular momentum, wher eas those t o
the right indicat e an incr ease in ang ular momentum.
9.3Bonding in Cr ystalline Solids
Learning Objectiv es
By the end o f this section, y ou wil l be able t o:
•Describe the packing s tructures of common solids
•Explain the dif ference be tween bonding in a solid and in a molecule
•Determine the equilibrium separ ation dis tance giv en cr ystal pr oper ties
•Determine the dissociation ener gy o f a salt giv en cr ystal pr oper ties
Beginning in this section , we study cr ystalline solids , which c onsis t of atoms arrang ed in an e xtende d regular
pattern c alled alattice. Solids tha t do not or are una ble to f orm cr ystals are clas sifie d as amorphous solids .
Although amorphous solids ( like glas s) ha ve a v ariety o f interes ting technologic al applic ations , the f ocus o f this
chapter will b e on cr ystalline solids .
Atoms arrang e themselv es in a la ttice to f orm a cr ystal b ecause o f a net a ttractiv e force between their
constituent electrons and a tomic nuclei . The cr ystals f orme d by the b onding o f atoms b elong to one o f three
categories , clas sifie d by their b onding: ionic , covalent , and metallic . Molecules c an also b ond tog ether to f orm
crystals; these b onds , not discus sed here , are clas sifie d as molecular . Early in the tw entieth c entur y, the a tomic
model o f a solid w as sp ecula tive. We no w ha ve direct evidenc e of atoms in solids ( Figure 9.7 ).402 9 • C ondensed Mat ter Phy sics
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Figur e9.7 An imag e made with a scanning tunneling micr oscope o f the sur face of graphit e. The peak s represent the at oms , which ar e
arranged in he xagons. The scale is in angs troms .
Ionic Bonding in Solids
Man y solids f orm b y ionic b onding . A prototypic al example is the so dium chloride cr ystal, as w e discus sed
earlier . Electrons trans fer from so dium a toms to adjac ent chlorine a toms , sinc e the v alenc e electrons in
sodium are lo osely b ound and chlorine has a larg e electron a ffinity . The p ositiv ely charg ed so dium ions and
negatively charg ed chlorine (chloride) ions org aniz e into an e xtende d regular arra y of atoms ( Figure 9.8 ).
Figur e9.8 Structur e of the sodium chloride cr ystal. The sodium and chloride ions ar e arr anged in a fac e-centered cubic (F CC) structur e.
The charg e dis tributions o f the so dium and chloride ions are spheric ally s ymmetric , and the chloride ion is
about tw o times the diameter o f the so dium ion . The lo west energ y arrang ement o f these ions is c alled the
face-centere d cubic (F CC)structure . In this s tructure , each ion is closes t to six ions o f the other sp ecies . The
unit c ell is a cub e—an a tom o ccupies the c enter and c orners o f each “fac e” of the cub e. The a ttractiv e potential9.3 • Bonding in Cr ystalline Solids 403

energ y of the ion due to the fields o f these six ions is writ ten
where the minus sign designa tes an a ttractiv e potential (and w e identif y ). At a dis tanc e are its
next-neares t neighb ors: tw elve ions o f the same charg e. The total repulsiv e potential energ y as sociated
with these ions is
Next closes t are eight ions a dis tanc e from the ion. The p otential energ y of the ion in the
field o f these eight ions is
Continuing in the same manner with alterna te sets o f and ions , we find tha t the net a ttractiv e
potential energ y of the single ion c an b e writ ten as
where is the Madelung c onstant , intro duced earlier . From this analy sis, we can see tha t this c onstant is the
infinite c onverging sum
Distant ions mak e a signific ant c ontribution to this sum , so it c onverges slo wly, and man y terms mus t be use d
to calcula te accura tely. For all F CC ionic solids ,is appro xima tely 1.75.
Other p ossible p acking arrang ements o f atoms in solids include simple cubic and body-centere d cubic (BC C).
These three diff erent p acking s tructures o f solids are c omp ared in Figure 9.9 . The firs t row represents the
location , but not the siz e, of the ions; the sec ond ro w indic ates the unit c ells o f each s tructure or la ttice; and the
third ro w represents the lo cation and siz e of the ions . The BC C structure has eight ne ares t neighb ors, with a
Madelung c onstant o f about 1.76— only slightly diff erent from tha t for the F CC structure . Determining the
Madelung c onstant f or sp ecific solids is difficult w ork and the subject o f current rese arch .9.14
9.15
9.16
9.17
9.18404 9 • C ondensed Mat ter Phy sics
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Figur e9.9 Packing s tructur es for solids fr om left t o right: (a) simple cubic, (b) body -centered cubic (BC C), and (c) fac e-centered cubic
(FCC). Each cr ystal s tructur e minimiz es the ener gy of the s ystem.
The energ y of the so dium ions is not entirely due to a ttractiv e forces b etween opp ositely charg ed ions . If the
ions are b ought to o close tog ether , the w ave functions o f core electrons o f the ions o verlap , and the electrons
repel due to the e xclusion principle . The total p otential energ y of the ion is theref ore the sum o f the
attractiv e Coulomb p otential and the repulsiv e potential as sociated with the e xclusion principle
Calcula ting this repulsiv e potential re quires p owerful c omputers . Fortuna tely, however, this energ y can b e
describ ed ac cura tely b y a simple f ormula tha t contains adjus table p arameters:
where the p arameters Aand nare chosen to giv e pre dictions c onsis tent with e xperimental da ta. F or the
problem a t the end o f this chapter , the p arameter nis ref erre d to as the repulsion c ons tant . The total p otential
energ y of the ion is theref ore
At equilibrium , there is no net f orce on the ion , so the dis tanc e between neighb oring and ions mus t
be the v alue for which Uis a minimum . Set ting , we ha ve9.19
9.209.3 • Bonding in Cr ystalline Solids 405

Thus ,
Inser ting this e xpres sion into the e xpres sion f or the total p otential energ y, we ha ve
Notice tha t the total p otential energ y no w has only one adjus table p arameter ,n. The p arameter Ahas b een
replac ed by a function in volving , the e quilibrium sep aration dis tanc e, which c an b e me asure d by a
diffraction e xperiment ( you le arne d about diffraction in a previous chapter). The total p otential energ y is
plot ted in Figure 9.10 for , the appro xima te value o fnfor N aCl.
Figur e9.10 The pot ential ener gy of a sodium ion in a NaCl cr ystal for . The equilibrium bond length oc curs when the ener gy is a
minimiz ed.
As long as , the cur ve forUhas the same g eneral shap e:Uappro aches infinity as and Uappro aches
zero as ∞. The minimum v alue o f the p otential energ y is giv en b y
The energ y per ion p air nee ded to sep arate the cr ystal into ions is theref ore
This is the dissociat ion ener gyof the solid . The dis sociation energ y can also b e use d to describ e the total
energ y nee ded to bre ak a mole o f a solid into its c onstituent ions , often e xpres sed in k J/mole . The dis sociation
energ y can b e determine d experimentally using the la tent he at of vaporiza tion . Sample v alues are giv en in the9.21
9.22
9.23
9.24
9.25406 9 • C ondensed Mat ter Phy sics
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

following ta ble.
Table 9.2Lattice Energ y for A lkali Metal Halides
Thus , we can determine the Madelung c onstant from the cr ystal s tructure and nfrom the la ttice energ y. For
NaCl, we ha ve , , and This dis sociation energ y is rela tively larg e. The
mos t energ etic photon from the visible sp ectr um, for e xample , has an energ y of appro xima tely
Because the ions in cr ystals are so tightly b ound , ionic cr ystals ha ve the f ollowing g eneral characteris tics:
1. The y are fairly hard and s table.
2. The y vaporiz e at rela tively high temp eratures (1000 to 2000 K ).
3. The y are transp arent to visible radia tion , because photons in the visible p ortion o f the sp ectr um are not
energ etic enough to e xcite an electron from its ground s tate to an e xcited state.
4. The y are p oor electric al conductors , because the y contain eff ectiv ely no free electrons .
5. The y are usually soluble in w ater, because the w ater molecule has a larg e dip ole moment whose electric field is
strong enough to bre ak the electros tatic b onds b etween the ions .
EXAMPLE 9.3
The Dis socia tion Ener gy of Sal t
Determine the dis sociation energ y of sodium chloride (N aCl) in k J/mol . (Hint: The repulsion c onstant nof NaCl
is appro xima tely 8.)
Strategy
A so dium chloride cr ystal has an e quilibrium sep aration o f 0.282 nm . (Comp are this v alue with 0.236 nm f or a
free dia tomic unit o f NaCl.) The dis sociation energ y dep ends on the sep aration dis tanc e, repulsion c onstant ,
and Madelung c onstant f or an F CC structure . The sep aration dis tanc e dep ends in turn on the molar mas s and
measure d density . We can determine the sep aration dis tanc e, and then use this v alue to determine the
dissociation energ y for one mole o f the solid .
Solution
The a tomic mas ses o f Na and Cl are 23.0 u and 58.4 u , so the molar mas s of NaCl is 58.4 g /mol . The density o f
NaCl is . The rela tionship b etween these quantities is
where Mis the mas s of one mole o f salt , is Avogadro ’s numb er, and is the e quilibrium sep aration
distanc e. The factor 2 is nee ded sinc e both the so dium and chloride ions represent a cubic v olume . Solving
for the dis tanc e, we get9.3 • Bonding in Cr ystalline Solids 407

or
The p otential energ y of one ion p air is
where is the Madelung c onstant , is the e quilibrium sep aration dis tanc e, and nis the repulsion c onstant .
NaCl is F CC, so the Madelung c onstant is Subs tituting these v alues , we get
The dis sociation energ y of one mole o f sodium chloride is theref ore
Significanc e
This theoretic al value o f the dis sociation energ y of 766 k J/mol is close to the ac cepte d experimental v alue o f
787 k J/mol . Notice tha t for larg er density , the e quilibrium sep aration dis tanc e between ion p airs is smaller , as
expecte d. This small sep aration dis tanc e driv es up the f orce between ions and theref ore the dis sociation
energ y. The c onversion a t the end o f the e qua tion to ok adv anta ge of the c onversion factor
CHE CK Y OUR UNDER STANDING 9.3
If the dis sociation energ y were larg er, would tha t mak e it e asier or more difficult to bre ak the solid ap art?
Covalent Bonding in Solids
Crystals c an also b e forme d by covalent b onding . For e xample , covalent b onds are resp onsible f or holding
carbon a toms tog ether in diamond cr ystals. The electron c onfigura tion o f the c arbon a tom is —a He
core plus f our v alenc e electrons . This electron c onfigura tion is f our electrons shor t of a full shell , so b y sharing
these f our electrons with other c arbon a toms in a c ovalent b ond , the shells o f all c arbon a toms are fille d.
Diamond has a more c omplic ated structure than mos t ionic cr ystals ( Figure 9.11 ). Each c arbon a tom is the
center o f a regular tetrahe dron , and the angle b etween the b onds is This angle is a direct c onse quenc e of
the directionality o f the porbitals o f carbon a toms .408 9 • C ondensed Mat ter Phy sics
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Figur e9.11 Structur e of the diamond cr ystal. (a) The single carbon at om r epresent ed b y the dark blue spher e is c ovalentl y bonded t o the
four carbon at oms r epresent ed b y the light blue spher es. (b) Gem-quality diamonds can be clea ved along smooth planes , which giv es a
large number o f angles that cause t otal int ernal r eflection o f incident light, and thus giv es diamonds their priz ed bril lianc e.
Covalently b onde d cr ystals are not as unif orm as ionic cr ystals but are re asona bly hard , difficult to melt , and
are insoluble in w ater. For e xample , diamond has an e xtremely high melting temp erature (4000 K ) and is
transp arent to visible light . In c omp arison , covalently b onde d tin (also kno wn as alpha-tin , which is
nonmetallic) is rela tively so ft, melts a t 600 K , and reflects visible light . Tw o other imp ortant e xamples o f
covalently b onde d cr ystals are silic on and g ermanium . Both o f these solids are use d extensiv ely in the
manufacture o f dio des, transis tors , and integra ted circuits . We will return to these ma terials la ter in our
discus sion o f semic onductors .
Metallic Bonding in Solids
As the name implies ,metallic b onding is resp onsible f or the f orma tion o f metallic cr ystals. The v alenc e
electrons are es sentially free o f the a toms and are a ble to mo ve rela tively e asily throughout the metallic
crystal. Bonding is due to the a ttractiv e forces b etween the p ositiv e ions and the c onduction electrons . Metallic
bonds are w eaker than ionic or c ovalent b onds , with dis sociation energies in the rang e .
9.4Free Elec tron Model o f Metals
Learning Objectiv es
By the end o f this section, y ou wil l be able t o:
•Describe the classical fr ee elec tron model o f me tals in terms o f the concep t elec tron number densit y
•Explain the quantum fr ee-elec tron model o f me tals in terms o f Pauli’s exclusion principle
•Calculate the ener gy le vels and ener gy-level spacing o f a fr ee elec tron in a me tal
Metals , such as c opp er and aluminum , are held tog ether b y bonds tha t are v ery diff erent from those o f
molecules . Rather than sharing and e xchanging electrons , a metal is es sentially held tog ether b y a s ystem o f
free electrons tha t wander throughout the solid . The simples t mo del o f a metal is the free electron mo del.
This mo del view s electrons as a g as. We firs t consider the simple one -dimensional c ase in which electrons
move freely along a line , such as through a v ery thin metal ro d. The p otential function U(x) for this c ase is a
one -dimensional infinite square w ell where the w alls o f the w ell c orresp ond to the e dges o f the ro d. This mo del
ignores the interactions b etween the electrons but resp ects the e xclusion principle . For the sp ecial c ase o f
Nelectrons fill up the energ y lev els, from lo west to highes t, two at a time (spin up and spin do wn),
until the highes t energ y lev el is fille d. The highes t energ y fille d is c alled the Fermi ener gy.
The one -dimensional free electron mo del c an b e impro ved by considering the three -dimensional c ase:
electrons mo ving freely in a three -dimensional metal blo ck. This s ystem is mo dele d by a three -dimensional9.4 • F ree Elec tron Model o f Metals 409

infinite square w ell. Determining the allo wed energ y states re quires us to solv e the time -indep endent
Schrö ding er e qua tion
where w e as sume tha t the p otential energ y inside the b ox is z ero and infinity other wise . The allo wed wave
functions describing the electron ’s quantum s tates c an b e writ ten as
where and are p ositiv e integ ers representing quantum numb ers c orresp onding to the motion in the
x-,y-, and z-directions , resp ectiv ely, and are the dimensions o f the b ox in those directions .
Equa tion 9.27 is simply the pro duct o f three one -dimensional w ave functions . The allo wed energies o f an
electron in a cub e are
Associated with e ach set o f quantum numb ers are tw o quantum s tates, spin up and spin do wn. In a
real ma terial , the numb er o f fille d states is enormous . For e xample , in a cubic c entimeter o f metal , this
numb er is on the order o f Counting ho w man y particles are in which s tate is difficult w ork, which o ften
requires the help o f a p owerful c omputer . The eff ort is w orthwhile , however, because this inf orma tion is o ften
an eff ectiv e way to check the mo del.
EXAMPLE 9.4
Ener gy of a Metal Cube
Consider a solid metal cub e of edge length 2.0 cm . (a) Wha t is the lo west energ y lev el for an electron within the
metal? ( b) Wha t is the sp acing b etween this lev el and the ne xt energ y lev el?
Strategy
An electron in a metal c an b e mo dele d as a w ave. The lo west energ y corresp onds to the larg est wavelength and
smalles t quantum numb er: Equa tion 9.28 supplies this “ ground s tate” energ y value .
Sinc e the energ y of the electron incre ases with the quantum numb er, the ne xt highes t lev el in volves the
smalles t incre ase in the quantum numb ers, or or (1, 1, 2).
Solution
The lo west energ y lev el corresp onds to the quantum numb ers From Equa tion 9.28 , the
energ y of this lev el is
The ne xt-higher energ y lev el is re ache d by incre asing an y one o f the three quantum numb ers b y 1. Henc e,
there are actually three quantum s tates with the same energ y. Supp ose w e incre ase by 1. Then the energ y
becomes9.26
9.27
ℏ9.28410 9 • C ondensed Mat ter Phy sics
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

The energ y sp acing b etween the lo west energ y state and the ne xt-highes t energ y state is theref ore
Significanc e
This is a v ery small energ y diff erenc e. Comp are this v alue to the a verage kinetic energ y of a p article , ,
where is Boltzmann ’s constant and Tis the temp erature . The pro duct is about 1000 times gre ater than
the energ y sp acing .
CHE CK Y OUR UNDER STANDING 9.4
Wha t happ ens to the ground s tate energ y of an electron if the dimensions o f the solid incre ase?
Often , we are not interes ted in the total numb er o f particles in all s tates, but ra ther the numb er o f particles dN
with energies in a narro w energ y inter val. This v alue c an b e expres sed by
where n(E) is the electron numb er densit y, or the numb er o f electrons p er unit v olume; g(E) is the densit y of
states , or the numb er o f allo wed quantum s tates p er unit energ y;dEis the siz e of the energ y inter val; and Fis
the Fermi f actor . The F ermi factor is the prob ability tha t the s tate will b e fille d. For e xample , ifg(E)dEis 100
available s tates, but Fis only , then the numb er o f particles in this narro w energ y inter val is only fiv e.
Finding g(E) requires solving Schrö ding er’s equa tion (in three dimensions) f or the allo wed energ y lev els. The
calcula tion is in volved ev en f or a cr ude mo del, but the result is simple:
where Vis the v olume o f the solid , is the mas s of the electron , and Eis the energ y of the s tate. Notice tha t
the density o f states incre ases with the square ro ot of the energ y. More s tates are a vailable a t high energ y than
at low energ y. This e xpres sion do esnot provide inf orma tion o f the density o f the electrons in ph ysical sp ace,
but ra ther the density o f energ y lev els in “ energ y sp ace.” For e xample , in our s tudy o f the a tomic s tructure , we
learne d tha t the energ y lev els o f a h ydrog en a tom are much more widely sp aced for small energ y values (ne ar
than ground s tate) than f or larg er values .
This e qua tion tells us ho w man y electron s tates are a vailable in a three -dimensional metallic solid . Ho wever, it
does not tell us ho w lik ely these s tates will b e fille d. Thus , we nee d to determine the F ermi factor ,F. Consider
the simple c ase o f . From clas sical ph ysics , we expect tha t all the electrons would
simply g o into the ground s tate to achiev e the lo west possible energ y. Ho wever, this viola tes P auli’s exclusion
principle , which s tates tha t no tw o electrons c an b e in the same quantum s tate. Henc e, when w e begin filling
the s tates with electrons , the s tates with lo west energ y become o ccupie d firs t, then s tates with progres sively
higher energies . The last electron we put in has the highes t energ y. This energ y is the F ermi energ y of the
free electron g as. A s tate with energ y is occupie d by a single electron , and a s tate with energ y
is uno ccupie d. To describ e this in terms o f a prob ability F(E) tha t a s tate of energ yEis occupie d, we write f or
:9.29
9.309.4 • F ree Elec tron Model o f Metals 411

The density o f states, Fermi factor , and electron numb er density are plot ted agains t energ y in Figure 9.12 .
Figur e9.12 (a) Density o f states for a fr ee electr on g as; (b) pr obability that a s tate is oc cupied at ; (c) density o f occupied s tates
at .
A few notes are in order . First, the electron numb er density ( last row) dis tribution drops o ff sharply a t the
Fermi energ y. According to the theor y, this energ y is giv en b y
Fermi energies f or selecte d ma terials are lis ted in the f ollowing ta ble.
Element Conduc tion Band Elec tron Densit y Free-Elec tron Model F ermi Ener gy
Table 9.3Conduction Electron Densities and F ermi Energies f or Some Metals
Note also tha t only the graph in p art (c) o f the figure , which ans wers the ques tion , “Ho w man y particles are
found in the energ y rang e?” is check ed by experiment . The Fermi temp erature or eff ectiv e “temp erature ” of
an electron a t the F ermi energ y is
EXAMPLE 9.5
Fermi Ener gy of Sil ver
Metallic silv er is an e xcellent c onductor . It has conduction electrons p er cubic meter . (a) C alcula te
its F ermi energ y. (b) C omp are this energ y to the thermal energ y of the electrons a t a ro om temp erature o f
300 K .
Solution
a.From Equa tion 9.31 , the F ermi energ y is9.31
9.32412 9 • C ondensed Mat ter Phy sics
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

This is a typic al value o f the F ermi energ y for metals , as c an b e seen from Table 9.3 .
b.We can as sociate a F ermi temp erature with the F ermi energ y by writing We then find f or
the F ermi temp erature
which is much higher than ro om temp erature and also the typic al melting p oint of a metal . The
ratio o f the F ermi energ y of silv er to the ro om-temp erature thermal energ y is
To visualiz e ho w the quantum s tates are fille d, we might ima gine p ouring w ater slo wly into a glas s, such as tha t
ofFigure 9.13 . The firs t drops o f water (the electrons) o ccup y the b ottom o f the glas s (the s tates with lo west
energ y). As the lev el rises , states o f higher and higher energ y are o ccupie d. Furthermore , sinc e the glas s has a
wide op ening and a narro w stem , more w ater o ccupies the top o f the glas s than the b ottom . This reflects the
fact tha t the density o f statesg(E) is prop ortional to , so there is a rela tively larg e numb er o f higher energ y
electrons in a free electron g as. Finally , the lev el to which the glas s is fille d corresp onds to the F ermi energ y.
Figur e9.13 An analog y of how electr ons fil l ener gy states in a metal . As electr ons fil l ener gy states, lowest to highes t, the number o f
available s tates incr eases . The highes t ener gy state (corresponding t o the w ater line) is the F ermi ener gy. (credit: modification o f work b y
“Didrik s”/Flickr)
Supp ose tha t at , the numb er o f conduction electrons p er unit v olume in our sample is . Sinc e each
field s tate has one electron , the numb er o f fille d states p er unit v olume is the same as the numb er o f electrons
per unit v olume .9.4 • F ree Elec tron Model o f Metals 413

9.5Band Theor y of Solids
Learning Objectiv es
By the end o f this section, y ou wil l be able t o:
•Describe t wo main appr oaches to de termining the ener gy le vels o f an elec tron in a cr ystal
•Explain the pr esence o f ener gy bands and gaps in the ener gy structure of a cr ystal
•Explain why some materials ar e good conduc tors and o thers are good insulator s
•Differentiate be tween an insulator and a semiconduc tor
The free electron mo del e xplains man y imp ortant prop erties o f conductors but is w eak in a t least two are as.
First, it as sumes a c onstant p otential energ y within the solid . (Recall tha t a c onstant p otential energ y is
associated with no f orces.)Figure 9.14 comp ares the as sumption o f a c onstant p otential energ y (dot ted line)
with the p erio dic C oulomb p otential , which drops as at each la ttice point , where ris the dis tanc e from the
ion c ore (solid line). Sec ond , the free electron mo del as sumes an imp enetra ble b arrier a t the sur face. This
assumption is not v alid , because under c ertain c onditions , electrons c an esc ape the sur face—such as in the
photo electric eff ect. In addition to these as sumptions , the free electron mo del do es not e xplain the drama tic
differenc es in electronic prop erties o f conductors , semic onductors , and insula tors . Theref ore, a more
complete mo del is nee ded.
Figur e9.14 The periodic pot ential used t o model electr ons in a c onduct or. Each ion in the solid is the sour ce of a Coulomb pot ential .
Notic e that the fr ee electr on model is pr oductiv e because the a verage of this field is appr oximat ely constant.
We can pro duce an impro ved mo del b y solving Schrö ding er’s equa tion f or the p erio dic p otential sho wn in
Figure 9.14 . Ho wever, the solution re quires technic al ma thema tics far b eyond our sc ope. We again seek a
qualita tive argument b ased on quantum mechanics to find a w ay forward.
We firs t review the argument use d to e xplain the energ y structure o f a c ovalent b ond . Consider tw o identic al
hydrog en a toms so far ap art tha t there is no interaction wha tsoever b etween them . Further supp ose tha t the
electron in e ach a tom is in the same ground s tate: a 1 selectron with an energ y of (ignore spin). When
the h ydrog en a toms are brought closer tog ether , the individual w ave functions o f the electrons o verlap and , by
the e xclusion principle , can no long er b e in the same quantum s tate, which splits the original e quiv alent
energ y lev els into tw o diff erent energ y lev els. The energies o f these lev els dep end on the intera tomic dis tanc e,
(Figure 9.15 ).
If four h ydrog en a toms are brought tog ether , four lev els are f orme d from the f our p ossible s ymmetries —a
single sine w ave “hump ” in e ach w ell, alterna ting up and do wn, and so on . In the limit o f a v ery larg e numb erN
of atoms , we expect a spre ad o f ne arly c ontinuous b ands o f electronic energ y lev els in a solid (see Figure
9.15 (c)). Each o f these b ands is kno wn as an ener gy band . (The allo wed states o f energ y and w ave numb er are
still technic ally quantiz ed, but f or larg e numb ers o f atoms , these s tates are so close tog ether tha t the y are414 9 • C ondensed Mat ter Phy sics
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

consider to b e continuous or “in the c ontinuum .”)
Energ y bands diff er in the numb er o f electrons the y hold . In the 1 sand 2 senerg y bands , each energ y lev el
holds up to tw o electrons (spin up and spin do wn), so this b and has a maximum o ccup ancy o f 2Nelectrons . In
the 2 penerg y band , each energ y lev el holds up to six electrons , so this b and has a maximum o ccup ancy o f 6N
electrons ( Figure 9.16 ).
Figur e9.15 The dependenc e of ener gy-level split ting on the a verage dis tanc e betw een (a) tw o atoms , (b) f our at oms , and (c) a lar ge
number o f atoms . For a lar ge number o f electr ons, a c ontinuous band o f ener gies is pr oduc ed.
Figur e9.16 A simple r epresentation o f the ener gy structur e of a solid. Electr ons belong t o ener gy bands separ ated b y ener gy gaps.
Each energ y band is sep arated from the other b y an ener gy gap. The electric al prop erties o f conductors and
insula tors c an b e unders tood in terms o f energ y bands and g aps. The highes t energ y band tha t is fille d is
kno wn as a valenc e band . The ne xt available b and in the energ y structure is kno wn as a conduct ion b and . In a
conductor , the highes t energ y band tha t contains electrons is p artially fille d, where as in an insula tor, the
highes t energ y band c ontaining electrons is c ompletely fille d. The diff erenc e between a c onductor and
insula tor is illus trated in Figure 9.17 .
A conductor diff ers from an insula tor in ho w its electrons resp ond to an applie d electric field . If a signific ant
numb er o f electrons are set into motion b y the field , the ma terial is a c onductor . In terms o f the b and mo del,
electrons in the p artially fille d conduction b and g ain kinetic energ y from the electric field b y filling higher
energ y states in the c onduction b and . By contras t, in an insula tor, electrons b elong to c ompletely fille d bands .
When the field is applie d, the electrons c annot mak e such transitions (ac quire kinetic energ y from the electric
field) due to the e xclusion principle . As a result , the ma terial do es not c onduct electricity .9.5 • Band Theor y of Solids 415

Figur e9.17 Comparison o f a c onduct or and insulat or. The highes t ener gy band is par tially filled in a c onduct or but c omplet ely filled in an
insulat or.
INTER ACTIVE
Visit this simula tion (https:/ /openstax.org/l/21b ands tructure) to le arn a bout the origin o f energ y bands in
crystals o f atoms and ho w the s tructure o f bands determines ho w a ma terial c onducts electricity . Explore ho w
band s tructure cre ates a la ttice of man y wells.
Asemic onductor has a similar energ y structure to an insula tor e xcept it has a rela tively small energ y gap
between the lo west completely fille d band and the ne xt available unfille d band . This typ e of ma terial f orms the
basis o f mo dern electronics . At , the semic onductor and insula tor b oth ha ve completely fille d bands .
The only diff erenc e is in the siz e of the energ y gap (or band g ap)Egbetween the highes t energ y band tha t is
fille d (the v alenc e band) and the ne xt-higher empty b and (the c onduction b and). In a semic onductor , this g ap is
small enough tha t a subs tantial numb er o f electrons from the v alenc e band are thermally e xcited into the
conduction b and a t room temp erature . These electrons are then in a ne arly empty b and and c an resp ond to an
applie d field . As a g eneral r ule o f thumb , the b and g ap o f a semic onductor is a bout 1 e V. (See Table 9.4 for
silic on.) A b and g ap o f gre ater than appro xima tely 1 e V is c onsidere d an insula tor. For c omp arison , the energ y
gap o f diamond (an insula tor) is sev eral electron-v olts.
Material Ener gy Gap416 9 • C ondensed Mat ter Phy sics
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Material Ener gy Gap
Table 9.4Energ y Gap for V arious Ma terials a t 300 K Note: Ex cept f or diamond , the ma terials lis ted are all
semic onductors .
9.6Semiconduc tors and Doping
Learning Objectiv es
By the end o f this section, y ou wil l be able t o:
•Describe changes to the ener gy structure of a semiconduc tor due to doping
•Distinguish be tween an n-t ype and p -type semiconduc tor
•Describe the Hall e ffect and e xplain its significance
•Calculate the char ge, drif t velocit y, and char ge carrier number densit y of a semiconduc tor using inf ormation
from a Hall e ffect experiment
In the prec eding section , we considere d only the c ontribution to the electric current due to electrons
occup ying s tates in the c onduction b and . Ho wever, mo ving an electron from the v alenc e band to the
conduction b and le aves an uno ccupie d state or hole in the energ y structure o f the v alenc e band , which a
nearby electron c an mo ve into . As these holes are fille d by other electrons , new holes are cre ated. The electric
current as sociated with this filling c an b e view ed as the c ollectiv e motion o f man y neg atively charg ed electrons
or the motion o f the p ositiv ely charg ed electron holes .
To illus trate, consider the one -dimensional la ttice in Figure 9.18 . Assume tha t each la ttice atom c ontributes
one v alenc e electron to the current . As the hole on the right is fille d, this hole mo ves to the left . The current c an
be interprete d as the flo w of positiv e charg e to the left . The density o f holes , or the numb er o f holes p er unit
volume , is represente d byp. Each electron tha t transitions into the c onduction b and le aves b ehind a hole . If
the c onduction b and is originally empty , the c onduction electron density pis equal to the hole density , tha t is,
.
Figur e9.18 The motion o f holes in a cr ystal lat tice. As electr ons shift t o the right, an electr on hole mo ves to the left.
As mentione d, a semic onductor is a ma terial with a fille d valenc e band , an unfille d conduction b and , and a
rela tively small energ y gap b etween the b ands . Excess electrons or holes c an b e intro duced into the ma terial
by the subs titution into the cr ystal la ttice of an impurit y atom , which is an a tom o f a slightly diff erent v alenc e
numb er. This pro cess is kno wn as doping . For e xample , supp ose w e add an arsenic a tom to a cr ystal o f silic on
(Figure 9.19 (a)).9.6 • Semiconduc tors and Doping 417

Figur e9.19 (a) A donor impurity and (b) an ac ceptor impurity . The intr oduction t o impurities and ac ceptors int o a semic onduct or
significantl y chang es the electr onic pr oper ties o f this mat erial .
Arsenic has fiv e valenc e electrons , where as silic on has only f our. This e xtra electron mus t theref ore g o into the
conduction b and , sinc e there is no ro om in the v alenc e band . The arsenic ion left b ehind has a net p ositiv e
charg e tha t weakly binds the delo calized electron . The binding is w eak b ecause the surrounding a tomic la ttice
shields the ion ’s electric field . As a result , the binding energ y of the e xtra electron is only a bout 0.02 e V. In
other w ords , the energ y lev el of the impurity electron is in the b and g ap b elow the c onduction b and b y 0.02 e V,
a much smaller v alue than the energ y of the g ap, 1.14 e V. At room temp erature , this impurity electron is e asily
excited into the c onduction b and and theref ore c ontributes to the c onductivity ( Figure 9.20 (a)). An impurity
with an e xtra electron is kno wn as a donor impurit y, and the dop ed semic onductor is c alled an n-type
semic onductor because the primar y carriers o f charg e (electrons) are neg ative.
Figur e9.20 (a) The e xtra electr on fr om a donor impurity is e xcited int o the c onduction band; (b) f ormation o f an impurity band in an
n-type semic onduct or.
By adding more donor impurities , we can cre ate an impurit y band , a new energ y band cre ated by
semic onductor doping , as sho wn in Figure 9.20 (b). The F ermi lev el is no w between this b and and the
conduction b and . At room temp erature , man y impurity electrons are thermally e xcited into the c onduction
band and c ontribute to the c onductivity . Conduction c an then also o ccur in the impurity b and as v acancies are
created there . Note tha t chang es in the energ y of an electron c orresp ond to a chang e in the motion ( velocities
or kinetic energ y) of these charg e carriers with the semic onductor , but not the bulk motion o f the
semic onductor itself.
Doping c an also b e ac complishe d using impurity a toms tha t typic ally ha ve one fewervalenc e electron than the
semic onductor a toms . For e xample , Al, which has three v alenc e electrons , can b e subs titute d for Si , as sho wn
inFigure 9.19 (b). Such an impurity is kno wn as an acceptor impurit y, and the dop ed semic onductor is c alled
ap-type semic onductor , because the primar y carriers o f charg e (holes) are p ositiv e. If a hole is tre ated as a
positiv e particle w eakly b ound to the impurity site , then an empty electron s tate is cre ated in the b and g ap jus t
above the v alenc e band . When this s tate is fille d by an electron thermally e xcited from the v alenc e band
(Figure 9.21 (a)), a mobile hole is cre ated in the v alenc e band . By adding more ac ceptor impurities , we can
create an impurity b and , as sho wn in Figure 9.21 (b).418 9 • C ondensed Mat ter Phy sics
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Figur e9.21 (a) An electr on fr om the c onduction band is e xcited int o the emp ty state resul ting fr om the ac ceptor impurity; (b) f ormation o f
an impurity band in a p-type semic onduct or.
The electric current o f a dop ed semic onductor c an b e due to the motion o f amajorit y carrier , in which holes
are c ontribute d by an impurity a tom , or due to a minorit y carrier , in which holes are c ontribute d purely b y
thermal e xcitations o f electrons acros s the energ y gap. In an n-typ e semic onductor , majority c arriers are free
electrons c ontribute d by impurity a toms , and minority c arriers are free electrons pro duced by thermal
excitations from the v alenc e to the c onduction b and . In a p-typ e semic onductor , the majority c arriers are free
holes c ontribute d by impurity a toms , and minority c arriers are free holes left b y the filling o f states due to
thermal e xcitation o f electrons acros s the g ap. In g eneral , the numb er o f majority c arriers far e xceeds the
minority c arriers . The c oncept o f a majority and minority c arriers will b e use d in the ne xt section to e xplain
the op eration o f dio des and transis tors .
In studying p- and n-typ e doping , it is na tural to ask: Do “ electron holes” re ally act lik e particles? The e xistenc e
of holes in a dop edp-typ e semic onductor is demons trated by the Hall eff ect. The Hall eff ect is the pro duction
of a p otential diff erenc e due to the motion o f a c onductor through an e xternal ma gnetic field (see The Hall
Effect). A schema tic o f the Hall eff ect is sho wn in Figure 9.22 (a). A semic onductor s trip is b athed in a unif orm
magnetic field ( which p oints into the p aper). As the electron holes mo ve from left to right through the
semic onductor , a Lorentz f orce driv es these charg es to ward the upp er end o f the s trip. (Recall tha t the motion
of the p ositiv ely charg ed carriers is determine d by the right -hand r ule.) Positiv e charg e continues to c ollect on
the upp er e dge of the s trip until the f orce as sociated with the do wnward electric field b etween the upp er and
lower e dges o f the s trip just balanc es the up ward ma gnetic f orce . Set ting these f orces
equal to e ach other , we ha ve . The v olta ge tha t dev elops acros s the s trip is theref ore
where is the Hall v olta ge;vis the hole ’sdrift v elocity, or a verage velocity o f a p article tha t mo ves in a
partially random fashion; Bis the ma gnetic field s trength; and wis the width o f the s trip. Note tha t the Hall
volta ge is trans verse to the v olta ge tha t initially pro duces current through the ma terial . A me asurement o f the
sign o f this v olta ge (or p otential diff erenc e) confirms the c ollection o f holes on the top side o f the s trip. The
magnitude o f the Hall v olta ge yields the drift v elocity ( v) of the majority c arriers .
Additional inf orma tion c an also b e extracte d from the Hall v olta ge. Note tha t the electron current density (the
amount o f current p er unit cros s-sectional are a of the semic onductor s trip) is
where qis the ma gnitude o f the charg e,nis the numb er o f charg e carriers p er unit v olume , and vis the drift
velocity. The current density is e asily determine d by dividing the total current b y the cros s-sectional are a of
the s trip,qis charg e of the hole (the ma gnitude o f the charg e of a single electron), and uis determine d by the
Hall eff ectEqua tion 9.34 . Henc e, the a bove expres sion f or the electron current density giv es the numb er o f
charg e carriers p er unit v olume ,n. A similar analy sis c an b e conducte d for neg atively charg ed carriers in an
n-typ e ma terial (see Figure 9.22 ).9.33
9.349.6 • Semiconduc tors and Doping 419

Figur e9.22 The Hal l effect. (a) P ositiv ely char ged electr on holes ar e drawn t o the left b y a unif orm magnetic field that points do wnward.
An electric field is g ener ated to the right. (b) Neg ative char ged electr ons ar e drawn t o the left b y a magnetic field that points up . An electric
field is g ener ated to the left.
9.7Semiconduc tor De vices
Learning Objectiv es
By the end o f this section, y ou wil l be able t o:
•Describe what occur s when n- and p -type materials ar e joined toge ther using the concep t of diffusion and
drift curr ent (z ero applied v oltage )
•Explain the r esponse o f a p -n junc tion to a f orward and r everse bias v oltage
•Describe the func tion o f a tr ansis tor in an elec tric cir cuit
•Use the concep t of a p -n junc tion to e xplain its applications in audio amplifier s and computer s
Semic onductors ha ve man y applic ations in mo dern electronics . We describ e some b asic semic onductor
devic es in this section . A gre at adv anta ge of using semic onductors f or circuit elements is the fact tha t man y
thousands or millions o f semic onductor devic es c an b e combine d on the same tin y piec e of silic on and
connecte d by conducting p aths. The resulting s tructure is c alled an integra ted circuit (ic), and ic chips are the
basis o f man y mo dern devic es, from c omputers and smar tphones to the internet and glob al communic ations
netw orks .
Diodes
Perhaps the simples t devic e tha t can b e cre ated with a semic onductor is a dio de. A dio de is a circuit element
that allo ws electric current to flo w in only one direction , like a one -way valve (see Model o f Conduction in
Metals ). A dio de is cre ated by joining a p-typ e semic onductor to an n-typ e semic onductor ( Figure 9.23 ). The
junction b etween these ma terials is c alled ap-njunct ion. A c omp arison o f the energ y bands o f a silic on-b ased
diode is sho wn in Figure 9.23 (b). The p ositions o f the v alenc e and c onduction b ands are the same , but the
impurity lev els are quite diff erent . When a p-njunction is f orme d, electrons from the c onduction b and o f the
n-typ e ma terial diffuse to the p-side , where the y combine with holes in the v alenc e band . This migra tion o f
charg e leaves p ositiv e ioniz ed donor ions on the n-side and neg ative ioniz ed ac ceptor ions on the p-side ,
producing a narro w double la yer o f charg e at the p-njunction c alled the deplet ion la yer. The electric field
associated with the depletion la yer prev ents fur ther diffusion . The p otential energ y for electrons acros s the p-
njunction is giv en b yFigure 9.24 .420 9 • C ondensed Mat ter Phy sics
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Figur e9.23 (a) R epresentation o f ap-njunction. (b) A c omparison o f the ener gy bands o fp-type and n-type silic on prior t o equilibrium.9.7 • Semiconduc tor De vices 421

Figur e9.24 At equilibrium, (a) e xcess char ge resides near the int erface and the net curr ent is z ero, and (b) the pot ential ener gy diff erence
for electr ons (in light blue) pr events fur ther diffusion o f electr ons int o the p-side .
The b ehavior o f a semic onductor dio de c an no w be unders tood. If the p ositiv e side o f the b attery is c onnecte d
to the n-typ e ma terial , the depletion la yer is widene d, and the p otential energ y diff erenc e acros s the p-n
junction is incre ased. Few or none o f the electrons ( holes) ha ve enough energ y to climb the p otential b arrier ,
and current is signific antly re duced. This is c alled the reverse bias c onfigurat ion. On the other hand , if the
positiv e side o f a b attery is c onnecte d to the p-typ e ma terial , the depletion la yer is narro wed, the p otential
energ y diff erenc e acros s the p-njunction is re duced, and electrons ( holes) flo w easily . This is c alled the
forward bias c onfigurat ion of the dio de. In sum , the dio de allo ws current to flo w freely in one direction but
prev ents current flo w in the opp osite direction . In this sense , the semic onductor dio de is a one -way valve.
We can es tima te the ma thema tical rela tionship b etween the current and v olta ge for a dio de using the electric
potential c oncept. Consider Nnegatively charg ed majority c arriers (electrons dona ted by impurity a toms) in
the n-typ e ma terial and a p otential b arrier Vacros s the p-njunction . According to the Maxw ell-Boltzmann
distribution , the fraction o f electrons tha t ha ve enough energ y to diffuse acros s the p otential b arrier is
. Ho wever, if a b attery of volta ge is applie d in the f orward-bias c onfigura tion , this fraction
impro ves to . The electric current due to the majority c arriers from the n-side to the p-side is
theref ore
where is the current with no applie d volta ge and Tis the temp erature . Current due to the minority c arriers
(thermal e xcitation o f electrons from the v alenc e band to the c onduction b and on the p-side and subse quent
attraction to the n-side) is , indep endent o f the bias v olta ge. The net current is theref ore9.35
9.36422 9 • C ondensed Mat ter Phy sics
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

A sample graph o f the current v ersus bias v olta ge is giv en in Figure 9.25 . In the f orward bias c onfigura tion ,
small chang es in the bias v olta ge lead to larg e chang es in the current . In the rev erse bias c onfigura tion , the
current is . For e xtreme v alues o f rev erse bias , the a toms in the ma terial are ioniz ed which trigg ers
an a valanche o f current . This c ase o ccurs a t the breakdown v olta ge.
Figur e9.25 Curr ent v ersus v oltage acr oss ap-njunction (diode). In the f orward bias c onfig uration, electric curr ent flo ws easil y. However,
in the r everse bias c onfig uration, electric curr ent flo w very little.
EXAMPLE 9.6
Diode Curr ent
Attaching the p ositiv e end o f a b attery to the p-side and the neg ative end to the n-side o f a semic onductor
diode pro duces a current o f The rev erse sa tura tion current is (The rev erse
satura tion current is the current o f a dio de in a rev erse bias c onfigura tion such as this .) The b attery volta ge is
0.12 V . Wha t is the dio de temp erature?
Strategy
The firs t arrang ement is a f orward bias c onfigura tion , and the sec ond is the rev erse bias c onfigura tion . In
either c ase,Equa tion 9.2 gives the current .
Solution
The current in the f orward and rev erse bias c onfigura tions is giv en b y
The current with no bias is rela ted to the rev erse sa tura tion current b y
Theref ore
Equa tion 9.2 can b e writ ten as
This ra tio is much gre ater than one , so the sec ond term on the left -hand side o f the e qua tion v anishes . Taking
the na tural log o f both sides giv es9.7 • Semiconduc tor De vices 423

The temp erature is theref ore
Significanc e
The current mo ving through a dio de in the f orward and rev erse bias c onfigura tion is sensitiv e to the
temp erature o f the dio de. If the p otential energ y supplie d by the b attery is larg e comp ared to the thermal
energ y of the dio de’s surroundings , then the f orward bias current is v ery larg e comp ared to the rev erse
satura tion current .
CHE CK Y OUR UNDER STANDING 9.5
How do es the ma gnitude o f the f orward bias current c omp are with the rev erse bias current?
INTER ACTIVE
Create a p-njunction and obser ve the b ehavior o f a simple circuit f or forward and rev erse bias v olta ges. Visit
this site (https:/ /openstax.org/l/21semic onductor) to le arn more a bout semic onductor dio des.
Junc tion T ransis tor
If dio des are one -way valves, transis tors are one -way valves tha t can b e carefully op ened and close d to c ontrol
current . A sp ecial kind o f transis tor is a junction transis tor. Ajunct ion transis torhas three p arts, including an
n-typ e semic onductor , also c alled the emit ter; a thin p-typ e semic onductor , which is the b ase; and another
n-typ e semic onductor , called the c ollector ( Figure 9.26 ). When a p ositiv e terminal is c onnecte d to the p-typ e
layer (the b ase), a small current o f electrons , called the base current flows to the terminal . This c auses a
larg ecollector current to flo w through the c ollector . The b ase current c an b e adjus ted to c ontrol the larg e
collector current . The current g ain is theref ore
Figur e9.26 A junction tr ansis tor has thr ee par ts: emit ter, base , and c ollector. Voltage applied t o the base acts as a v alve to contr ol
electric curr ent fr om the emit ter to the c ollector.
A junction transis tor c an b e use d to amplif y the v olta ge from a microphone to driv e a loudsp eaker. In this
applic ation , sound w aves c ause a diaphra gm inside the microphone to mo ve in and out rapidly ( Figure 9.27 ).
When the diaphra gm is in the “in ” position , a tin y positiv e volta ge is applie d to the b ase o f the transis tor. This9.37424 9 • C ondensed Mat ter Phy sics
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

opens the transis tor “ valve” and allo ws a larg e electric al current flo w to the loudsp eaker. When the diaphra gm
is in the “ out” position , a tin y neg ative volta ge is applie d to the b ase o f the transis tor, which shuts o ff the
transis tor v alve so tha t no current flo ws to the loudsp eaker. This shuts the transis tor “ valve” off so no current
flows to the loudsp eaker. In this w ay, current to the sp eaker is c ontrolle d by the sound w aves, and the sound is
amplifie d. An y electric devic e tha t amplifies a signal is c alled an amplifier .
Figur e9.27 An audio amplifier based on a junction tr ansis tor. Voltage applied t o the base b y a micr ophone acts as a v alve to contr ol a
larger electric curr ent that pas ses thr ough a loudspeak er.
In mo dern electronic devic es, digital signals are use d with dio des and transis tors to p erform tasks such as da ta
manipula tion . Electric circuits c arry tw o typ es o f electric al signals: analog and digital ( Figure 9.28 ). An analog
signal v aries c ontinuously , where as a digital signal s witches b etween tw o fix ed volta ge values , such as plus 1
volt and z ero v olts. In digital circuits lik e those f ound in c omputers , a transis tor b ehaves lik e an on-o ff switch .
The transis tor is either on , me aning the v alve is c ompletely op en, or it is o ff, me aning the v alve is c ompletely
close d. Integra ted circuits c ontain v ast collections o f transis tors on a single piec e of silic on. The y are designe d
to handle digital signals tha t represent ones and z eroes, which is also kno wn as binar y code. The in vention o f
the ic help ed to la unch the mo dern c omputer rev olution .
Figur e9.28 Real-world data ar e often analog , meaning data can v ary continuousl y. Int ensity v alues o f sound or visual imag es ar e usual ly
analog . These data ar e converted int o digital signals f or electr onic pr ocessing in r ecording de vices or c omput ers. The digital signal is
gener ated fr om the analog signal b y requiring c ertain v oltage cut -off value .9.7 • Semiconduc tor De vices 425

9.8Super conduc tivity
Learning Objectiv es
By the end o f this section, y ou wil l be able t o:
•Describe the main f eatur es of a super conduc tor
•Describe the BC S theor y of super conduc tivity
•Determine the critical magne tic field f or T = 0 K fr om magne tic field data
•Calculate the maximum emf or curr ent f or a wir e to r emain super conduc ting
Electric al resis tanc e can b e considere d as a me asure o f the frictional f orce in electric al current flo w. Thus ,
electric al resis tanc e is a primar y sourc e of energ y dis sipation in electric al systems such as electroma gnets ,
electric motors , and transmis sion lines . Copp er wire is c ommonly use d in electric al wiring b ecause it has one
of the lo west room-temp erature electric al resis tivities among c ommon c onductors . (Actually , silv er has a lo wer
resis tivity than c opp er, but the high c ost and limite d availability o f silv er outw eigh its sa vings in energ y over
copp er.)
Although our discus sion o f conductivity seems to imply tha t all ma terials mus t ha ve electric al resis tanc e, we
kno w tha t this is not the c ase. When the temp erature decre ases b elow a critic al value f or man y ma terials , their
electric al resis tivity drops to z ero, and the ma terials b ecome sup erconductors (see Sup erconductors ).
INTER ACTIVE
Watch this NOVAvideo (https:/ /openstax.org/l/21NO VA)excerpt , Making Stuff C older , as an intro duction to the
topic o f sup erconductivity and its man y applic ations .
Proper ties o f Super conduc tors
In addition to z ero electric al resis tanc e, sup erconductors also ha ve perfect diama gnetism . In other w ords , in
the presenc e of an applie d ma gnetic field , the net ma gnetic field within a sup erconductor is alw ays zero
(Figure 9.29 ). Theref ore, any ma gnetic field lines tha t pass through a sup erconducting sample when it is in its
normal s tate are e xpelled onc e the sample b ecomes sup erconducting . These are manif estations o f the
Meis sner eff ect, which y ou le arne d about in the chapter on current and resis tanc e.
Figur e9.29 (a) In the Meis sner eff ect, a magnetic field is e xpel led fr om a mat erial onc e it bec omes super conducting . (b) A magnet can
levitat e abo ve a super conducting mat erial , suppor ted b y the f orce expel ling the magnetic field. (cr edit b: modification o f work b y Kevin
Jarr ett)
Interes tingly , the Meis sner eff ect is not a c onse quenc e of the resis tanc e being z ero. To see wh y, supp ose tha t a
sample plac ed in a ma gnetic field underg oes a transition in which its resis tanc e drops to z ero. From Ohm ’s law,426 9 • C ondensed Mat ter Phy sics
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

the current density ,j, in the sample is rela ted to the net internal electric field ,E, and the resis tivity by
. If is zero,Emus t also b e zero so tha tjcan remain finite . NowEand the ma gnetic flux through
the sample are rela ted by Farada y’s law as
IfEis zero, is also z ero, tha t is, the ma gnetic flux through the sample c annot chang e. The ma gnetic
field lines within the sample should theref ore not b e expelled when the transition o ccurs . Henc e, it do es not
follow tha t a ma terial whose resis tanc e goes to z ero has to e xhibit the Meis sner eff ect. Rather , the Meis sner
effect is a sp ecial prop erty of sup erconductors .
Another imp ortant prop erty of a sup erconducting ma terial is its crit ical temp erature ,, the temp erature
below which the ma terial is sup erconducting . The kno wn rang e of critic al temp eratures is from a fraction o f 1
K to slightly a bove 100 K . Sup erconductors with critic al temp eratures ne ar this higher limit are c ommonly
kno wn as “high-temp erature ” sup erconductors . From a practic al standp oint , sup erconductors f or which
are v ery imp ortant . At present , applic ations in volving sup erconductors o ften s till re quire tha t
superconducting ma terials b e immerse d in liquid helium (4.2 K ) in order to k eep them b elow their critic al
temp erature . The liquid helium b aths mus t be continually replenishe d because o f evaporation , and c ooling
costs can e asily outw eigh the sa vings in using a sup erconductor . Ho wever, 77 K is the temp erature o f liquid
nitrog en, which is far more a bundant and ine xpensiv e than liquid helium . It w ould b e much more c ost-
effectiv e if w e could e asily fa bric ate and use high-temp erature sup erconductor c omp onents tha t only nee d to
be kept in liquid nitrog en b aths to maintain their sup erconductivity .
High-temp erature sup erconducting ma terials are presently in use in v arious applic ations . An e xample is the
production o f ma gnetic fields in some p article ac celera tors . The ultima te goal is to disc over ma terials tha t are
superconducting a t room temp erature . Without an y cooling re quirements , the bulk o f electronic c omp onents
and transmis sion lines c ould b e sup erconducting , resulting in drama tic and unprec edente d incre ases in
efficiency and p erformanc e.
Another imp ortant prop erty of a sup erconducting ma terial is its crit ical ma gnet ic field which is the
maximum applie d ma gnetic field a t a temp erature Tthat will allo w a ma terial to remain sup erconducting . An
applie d field tha t is gre ater than the critic al field will des troy the sup erconductivity . The critic al field is z ero a t
the critic al temp erature and incre ases as the temp erature decre ases . Plots o f the critic al field v ersus
temp erature f or sev eral sup erconducting ma terials are sho wn in Figure 9.30 . The temp erature dep endenc e of
the critic al field c an b e describ ed appro xima tely b y
where is the critic al field a t absolute z ero temp erature .Table 9.5 lists the critic al temp eratures and fields
for tw o clas ses o f sup erconductors: type I sup erconductor and type II sup erconductor . In g eneral , typ e I
superconductors are elements , such as aluminum and mercur y. The y are p erfectly diama gnetic b elow a
critic al field BC(T), and enter the normal non-sup erconducting s tate onc e tha t field is e xceeded. The critic al
fields o f typ e I sup erconductors are g enerally quite lo w (well b elow one tesla). F or this re ason , the y cannot b e
used in applic ations re quiring the pro duction o f high ma gnetic fields , which w ould des troy their
superconducting s tate.9.38
9.399.8 • Super conduc tivity 427

Figur e9.30 The t emper atur e dependenc e of the critical field f or se veral super conduct ors. Super conductivity oc curs f or magnetic fields
and t emper atur es belo w the cur ves sho wn.
Material Critical T emper ature Critical Magne tic Field
Type I
Type II428 9 • C ondensed Mat ter Phy sics
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Material Critical T emper ature Critical Magne tic Field
Table 9.5Critic al Temp erature and C ritic al Ma gnetic F ield a t for V arious Sup erconductors
Type II sup erconductors are g enerally c omp ounds or allo ys involving transition metals or actinide series
elements . Almos t all sup erconductors with rela tively high critic al temp eratures are typ e II. The y ha ve tw o
critic al fields , represente d by and . When the field is b elow type II sup erconductors are
perfectly diama gnetic , and no ma gnetic flux p enetra tion into the ma terial c an o ccur. For a field e xceeding
they are driv en into their normal s tate. When the field is gre ater than but les s than
type II sup erconductors are said to b e in a mix ed state. Although there is some ma gnetic flux p enetra tion in
the mix ed state, the resis tanc e of the ma terial is z ero. Within the sup erconductor , filament -like regions e xist
that ha ve normal electric al and ma gnetic prop erties intersp erse d between regions tha t are sup erconducting
with p erfect diama gnetism . A representa tion o f this s tate is giv en in Figure 9.31 . The ma gnetic field is e xpelled
from the sup erconducting regions but e xists in the normal regions . In g eneral , is very larg e comp ared
with the critic al fields o f typ e I sup erconductors , so wire made o f typ e II sup erconducting ma terial is suita ble
for the windings o f high-field ma gnets .
Figur e9.31 A schematic r epresentation o f the mix ed s tate of a type II super conduct or. Super conduct ors (the gr ay squar es) e xpel
magnetic fields in their vicinity .
EXAMPLE 9.7
Niobium Wir e
In an e xperiment , a niobium (Nb) wire o f radius 0.25 mm is immerse d in liquid helium ( ) and
require d to c arry a current o f 300 A . Do es the wire remain sup erconducting?
Strategy
The applie d ma gnetic field c an b e determine d from the radius o f the wire and current . The critic al ma gnetic
field c an b e determine d from Equa tion 9.1 , the prop erties o f the sup erconductor , and the temp erature . If the9.8 • Super conduc tivity 429

applie d ma gnetic field is gre ater than the critic al field , then sup erconductivity in the Nb wire is des troyed.
Solution
At the critic al field f or Nb is , from Equa tion 9.1 and Table 9.5 ,
In an e arlier chapter , we learne d the ma gnetic field inside a current -carrying wire o f radius ais giv en b y
where ris the dis tanc e from the c entral axis o f the wire . Thus , the field a t the sur face of the wire is For
the niobium wire , this field is
Sinc e this e xceeds the critic al 0.16 T , the wire do es not remain sup erconducting .
Significanc e
Sup erconductivity re quires lo w temp eratures and lo w ma gnetic fields . These simultaneous c onditions are met
less easily f or Nb than f or man y other metals . For e xample , aluminum sup erconducts a t temp eratures 7 times
lower and ma gnetic fields 18 times lo wer.
CHE CK Y OUR UNDER STANDING 9.6
Wha t conditions are nec essary for sup erconductivity?
Theor y of Super conduc tors
A suc cessful theor y of sup erconductivity w as dev elop ed in the 1950s b y John Bardeen , Leon Cooper, and J .
RobertSchrieff er, for which the y rec eived the N obel Prize in 1972. This theor y is kno wn as the BCS theor y.
BCS theor y is c omple x, so w e summariz e it qualita tively b elow.
In a normal c onductor , the electric al prop erties o f the ma terial are due to the mos t energ etic electrons ne ar the
Fermi energ y. In 1956, C ooper sho wed tha t if there is an y attractiv e interaction b etween tw o electrons a t the
Fermi lev el, then the electrons c an f orm a b ound s tate in which their total energ y is les s than . Tw o such
electrons are kno wn as a Cooper p air.
It is hard to ima gine tw o electrons a ttracting e ach other , sinc e the y ha ve lik e charg e and should rep el. Ho wever,
the prop osed interaction o ccurs only in the c onte xt of an a tomic la ttice. A depiction o f the a ttraction is sho wn
inFigure 9.32 . Electron 1 slightly displac es the p ositiv ely charg ed atomic nuclei to ward itself as it tra vels p ast
because o f the C oulomb a ttraction . Electron 2 “ sees” a region with a higher density o f positiv e charg e rela tive
to the surroundings and is theref ore a ttracte d into this region and , theref ore indirectly , to electron 1. Bec ause
of the e xclusion principle , the tw o electrons o f a C ooper p air mus t ha ve opp osite spin .430 9 • C ondensed Mat ter Phy sics
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Figur e9.32 A Cooper pair can f orm as a r esul t of the displac ement o f positiv e atomic nuclei. Electr on 1 slightl y displac es the positiv ely
char ged at omic nuclei t oward itself as it tr avels pas t because o f the Coulomb at traction. Electr on 2 “ sees” a r egion with a higher density o f
positiv e char ge relativ e to the surr oundings and is ther efore attracted int o this r egion.
The BCS theor y extends C ooper’s ide as, which are f or a single p air o f electrons , to the entire free electron g as.
When the transition to the sup erconducting s tate occurs , all the electrons p air up to f orm C ooper p airs . On an
atomic sc ale, the dis tanc e between the tw o electrons making up a C ooper p air is quite larg e. Betw een these
electrons are typic ally a bout other electrons , each also p airs with a dis tant electron . Henc e, there is
considera ble o verlap b etween the w ave functions o f the individual C ooper p airs , resulting in a s trong
correla tion among the motions o f the p airs . The y all mo ve tog ether “in s tep,” lik e the memb ers o f a marching
band . In the sup erconducting transition , the density o f states b ecomes dras tically chang ed ne ar the F ermi
level. As sho wn in Figure 9.33 , an energ y gap app ears around because the c ollection o f Cooper p airs has
lower ground s tate energ y than the F ermi g as o f noninteracting electrons . The app earanc e of this g ap
characteriz es the sup erconducting s tate. If this s tate is des troyed, then the g ap disapp ears, and the density o f
states rev erts to tha t of the free electron g as.
Figur e9.33 A relativ ely lar ge ener gy gap is f ormed ar ound the F ermi ener gy when a mat erial bec omes super conducting . If this s tate is
destroyed, then the g ap disappears , and the density o f states reverts to that o f the fr ee electr on g as.
The BCS theor y is a ble to pre dict man y of the prop erties obser ved in sup erconductors . Examples include the
Meis sner eff ect, the critic al temp erature , the critic al field , and , perhaps mos t imp ortantly , the resis tivity
becoming z ero a t a critic al temp erature . We can think a bout this las t phenomenon qualita tively as f ollows. In a
normal c onductor , resis tivity results from the interaction o f the c onduction electrons with the la ttice. In this9.8 • Super conduc tivity 431

interaction , the energ y exchang ed is on the order o f the thermal energ y. In a sup erconductor , electric
current is c arrie d by the C ooper p airs . The only w ay for a la ttice to sc atter a C ooper p air is to bre ak it up . The
destruction o f one p air then des troys the c ollectiv e motion o f all the p airs . This des truction re quires energ y on
the order o f , which is the siz e of the energ y gap. Belo w the critic al temp erature , there is not enough
thermal energ y available f or this pro cess, so the C ooper p airs tra vel unimp eded throughout the
superconductor .
Finally , it is interes ting to note tha t no evidenc e of sup erconductivity has b een f ound in the b est normal
conductors , such as c opp er and silv er. This is not une xpecte d, giv en the BCS theor y. The b asis f or the
forma tion o f the sup erconducting s tate is an interaction b etween the electrons and the la ttice. In the b est
conductors , the electron-la ttice interaction is w eakest, as evident from their minimal resis tivity . We might
expect then tha t in these ma terials , the interaction is so w eak tha t Cooper p airs c annot b e forme d, and
superconductivity is theref ore preclude d.432 9 • C ondensed Mat ter Phy sics
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

CHAP TER RE VIEW
Key Terms
acceptor impurit yatom subs titute d for another in
a semic onductor tha t results in a free electron
amplifier electric al devic e tha t amplifies an
electric signal
base current current dra wn from the b ase n-typ e
material in a transis tor
BCS theor ytheor y of sup erconductivity b ased on
electron-la ttice-electron interactions
body-centere d cubic (BC C) crystal s tructure in
which an ion is surrounde d by eight ne ares t
neighb ors lo cated at the c orners o f a unit c ell
breakdown v olta gein a dio de, the rev erse bias
volta ge nee ded to c ause an a valanche o f current
collector current current dra wn from the c ollector
p-typ e ma terial
conduct ion b and above the v alenc e band , the ne xt
available b and in the energ y structure o f a cr ystal
Cooper p air couple d electron p air in a
superconductor
covalent b ond bond f orme d by the sharing o f one
or more electrons b etween a toms
crit ical ma gnet ic field maximum field re quire d to
produce sup erconductivity
crit ical temp erature maximum temp erature to
produce sup erconductivity
densit y of s tates numb er o f allo wed quantum
states p er unit energ y
deplet ion la yer region ne ar the p-njunction tha t
produces an electric field
dissociat ion ener gyamount o f energ y nee ded to
break ap art a molecule into a toms; also , total
energ y per ion p air to sep arate the cr ystal into
isola ted ions
donor impurit yatom subs titute d for another in a
semic onductor tha t results in a free electron hole
doping altera tion o f a semic onductor b y the
subs titution o f one typ e of atom with another
drift v elocityaverage velocity o f a randomly
moving p article
electric dip ole transit ion transition b etween
energ y lev els brought b y the a bsorption or
emis sion o f radia tion
electron affinit yenerg y as sociated with an
accepte d (bound) electron
electron numb er densit ynumb er o f electrons p er
unit v olume
ener gy band nearly c ontinuous b and o f electronic
energ y lev els in a solid
ener gy gap gap b etween energ y bands in a solid
equilibrium sep arat ion dis tanc edistanc ebetween a toms in a molecule
exchang e symmetr yhow a total w ave function
chang es under the e xchang e of two electrons
face-centere d cubic (F CC) crystal s tructure in
which an ion is surrounde d by six ne ares t
neighb ors lo cated at the fac es a t the fac es o f a
unit c ell
Fermi ener gylarg est energ y fille d by electrons in a
metal a t
Fermi f actor numb er tha t expres ses the
prob ability tha t a s tate of giv en energ y will b e
fille d
Fermi temp erature effectiv e temp erature o f
electrons with energies e qual to the F ermi energ y
forward bias c onfigurat ion diode c onfigura tion
that results in high current
free electron mo del model o f a metal tha t view s
electrons as a g as
hole uno ccupie d states in an energ y band
hybridizat ion chang e in the energ y structure o f an
atom in which energ etically fa vorable mix ed
states p articip ate in b onding
impurit y atom acceptor or donor impurity a tom
impurit y band new energ y band cre ate by
semic onductor doping
ionic b ond bond f orme d by the C oulomb a ttraction
of a p ositiv e and neg ative ions
junct ion transis tor electric al valve based on a p-n-
pjunction
latticeregular arra y or arrang ement o f atoms into
a cr ystal s tructure
Madelung c ons tant constant tha t dep ends on the
geometr y of a cr ystal use d to determine the total
potential energ y of an ion in a cr ystal
majorit y carrier free electrons (or holes)
contribute d by impurity a toms
minorit y carrier free electrons (or holes) pro duced
by thermal e xcitations acros s the energ y gap
n-type semic onductor dop ed semic onductor tha t
conducts electrons
p-njunct ion junction f orme d by joining p- and
n-typ e semic onductors
p-type semic onductor dop ed semic onductor tha t
conducts holes
polyatomic molecule molecule f orme d of more
than one a tom
repulsion c ons tant experimental p arameter
associated with a repulsiv e force between ions
brought so close tog ether tha t the e xclusion
principle is imp ortant9 • Chap ter Re view 433

reverse bias c onfigurat ion diode c onfigura tion
that results in lo w current
rotat ional ener gy level energ y lev el as sociated
with the rota tional energ y of a molecule
select ion r ule rule tha t limits the p ossible
transitions from one quantum s tate to another
semic onductor solid with a rela tively small energ y
gap b etween the lo west completely fille d band
and the ne xt available unfille d band
simple cubic basic cr ystal s tructure in which e ach
ion is lo cated at the no des o f a three -dimensional
gridtype I sup erconductor superconducting element ,
such as aluminum or mercur y
type II sup erconductor superconducting
comp ound or allo y, such as a transition metal or
an actinide series element
valenc e band highes t energ y band tha t is fille d in
the energ y structure o f a cr ystal
van der W aals b ond bond f orme d by the a ttraction
of two electric ally p olariz ed molecules
vibrat ional ener gy level energ y lev el as sociated
with the vibra tional energ y of a molecule
Key Equations
Electros tatic energ y for e quilibrium sep aration dis tanc e between a toms
Energ y chang e as sociated with ionic b onding
Critic al ma gnetic field o f a sup erconductor
Rotational energ y of a dia tomic moleculeℏ
Characteris tic rota tional energ y of a moleculeℏ
Potential energ y as sociated with the e xclusion principle
Dissociation energ y of a solid
Moment o f iner tia o f a dia tomic molecule with re duced mas s
Electron energ y in a metalℏ
Electron density o f states o f a metal
Fermi energ y
Fermi temp erature
Hall eff ect
Current v ersus bias v olta ge acros sp-njunction434 9 • Chap ter Re view
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Current g ain
Selection r ule f or rota tional energ y transitions
Selection r ule f or vibra tional energ y transitions
Summar y
9.1Types o f Molecular Bonds
•Molecules f orm b y tw o main typ es o f bonds: the
ionic b ond and the c ovalent b ond . An ionic b ond
trans fers an electron from one a tom to another ,
and a c ovalent b ond shares the electrons .
•The energ y chang e as sociated with ionic
bonding dep ends on three main pro cesses: the
ioniza tion o f an electron from one a tom , the
acceptanc e of the electron b y the sec ond a tom ,
and the C oulomb a ttraction o f the resulting ions .
•Covalent b onds in volve sp ace-symmetric w ave
functions .
•Atoms use a line ar combina tion o f wave
functions in b onding with other molecules
(hybridiza tion).
9.2Molecular Spec tra
•Molecules p ossess vibra tional and rota tional
energ y.
•Energ y diff erenc es b etween adjac ent vibra tional
energ y lev els are larg er than those b etween
rota tional energ y lev els.
•Sep aration b etween p eaks in an a bsorption
spectr um is in versely rela ted to the moment o f
iner tia.
•Transitions b etween vibra tional and rota tional
energ y lev els f ollow selection r ules .
9.3Bonding in Cr ystalline Solids
•Packing s tructures o f common ionic salts
include F CC and BC C.
•The density o f a cr ystal is in versely rela ted to
the e quilibrium c onstant .
•The dis sociation energ y of a salt is larg e when
the e quilibrium sep aration dis tanc e is small .
•The densities and e quilibrium radii f or c ommon
salts (F CC) are ne arly the same .
9.4Free Elec tron Model o f Metals
•Metals c onduct electricity , and electricity is
comp osed of larg e numb ers o f randomly
colliding and appro xima tely free electrons .
•The allo wed energ y states o f an electron arequantiz ed. This quantiza tion app ears in the
form o f very larg e electron energies , even a t
.
•The allo wed energies o f free electrons in a metal
dep end on electron mas s and on the electron
numb er density o f the metal .
•The density o f states o f an electron in a metal
incre ases with energ y, because there are more
ways for an electron to fill a high-energ y state
than a lo w-energ y state.
•Pauli’s exclusion principle s tates tha t only tw o
electrons (spin up and spin do wn) c an o ccup y
the same energ y lev el. Theref ore, in filling these
energ y lev els ( lowest to highes t at the
last and larg est energ y lev el to b e occupie d is
called the F ermi energ y.
9.5Band Theor y of Solids
•The energ y lev els o f an electron in a cr ystal c an
be determine d by solving Schrö ding er’s
equa tion f or a p erio dic p otential and b y
studying chang es to the electron energ y
structure as a toms are pushe d tog ether from a
distanc e.
•The energ y structure o f a cr ystal is
characteriz ed by continuous energ y bands and
energ y gaps.
•The a bility o f a solid to c onduct electricity relies
on the energ y structure o f the solid .
9.6Semiconduc tors and Doping
•The energ y structure o f a semic onductor c an b e
altere d by subs tituting one typ e of atom with
another (doping ).
•Semic onductor n-typ e doping cre ates and fills
new energ y lev els jus t below the c onduction
band .
•Semic onductor p-typ e doping cre ates new
energ y lev els jus t above the v alenc e band .
•The Hall eff ect c an b e use d to determine charg e,
drift v elocity, and charg e carrier numb er
density o f a semic onductor .9 • Chap ter Re view 435

9.7Semiconduc tor De vices
•A dio de is pro duced by an n-p junction . A dio de
allows current to mo ve in jus t one direction . In
forward biase d configura tion o f a dio de, the
current incre ases e xponentially with the
volta ge.
•A transis tor is pro duced by an n-p-njunction . A
transis tor is an electric v alve tha t controls the
current in a circuit .
•A transis tor is a critic al comp onent in a udio
amplifiers , computers , and man y other devic es.9.8Super conduc tivity
•A sup erconductor is characteriz ed by tw o
features: the c onduction o f electrons with z ero
electric al resis tanc e and the rep elling o f
magnetic field lines .
•A minimum temp erature is re quire d for
superconductivity to o ccur.
•A strong ma gnetic field des troys
superconductivity .
•Sup erconductivity c an b e explain in terms o f
Cooper p airs .
Concep tual Ques tions
9.1Types o f Molecular Bonds
1.Wha t is the main diff erenc e between an ionic
bond , acovalent b ond , and a van der W aals
bond ?
2.For the f ollowing c ases , wha t typ e of bonding is
expecte d? (a) K Cl molecule; ( b) molecule .
3.Describ e three s teps to ionic b onding .
4.Wha t prev ents a p ositiv e and neg ative ion from
having a z ero sep aration?
5.For the molecule , wh y mus t the spins the
electron spins b e antip arallel?
9.2Molecular Spec tra
6.Does the a bsorption sp ectr um o f the dia tomic
molecule HCl dep end on the isotop e of chlorine
containe d in the molecule? Explain y our
reasoning .
7.Rank the energ y sp acing of the f ollowing
transitions from le ast to gre atest: an electron
energ y transition in an a tom (a tomic energ y), the
rota tional energ y of a molecule , or the vibra tional
energ y of a molecule?
8.Explain k ey features o f a vibra tional-rota tion
energ y sp ectr um o f the dia tomic molecule .
9.3Bonding in Cr ystalline Solids
9.Why is the e quilibrium sep aration dis tanc e
between different f or a dia tomic
molecule than f or solid K Cl?
10.Describ e the diff erenc e between a fac e-centere d
cubic s tructure (F CC) and a b ody-centere d
cubic s tructure (BC C).
11.In so dium chloride , how man y atoms are
“neares t neighb ors” o f ? Ho w man y
atoms are “ne ares t neighb ors” o f ?
12.In cesium io dide , how man y atoms are
“neares t neighb ors” o f ? Ho w man yatoms are “ne ares t neighb ors” o f ?
13.The N aCl cr ystal s tructure is F CC. The
equilibrium sp acing is . If e ach
ion o ccupies a cubic v olume o f, estima te the
distanc e between “ne ares t neighb or” ions
(center -to-center)?
9.4Free Elec tron Model o f Metals
14.Why do es the F ermi energ y incre ase with
the numb er o f electrons in a metal?
15.If the electron numb er density ( N/V) of a metal
incre ases b y a factor 8, wha t happ ens to the
Fermi energ y
16.Why do es the horiz ontal line in the graph in
Figure 9.12 suddenly s top a t the F ermi energ y?
17.Why do es the graph in Figure 9.12 incre ase
gradually from the origin?
18.Why are the sharp transitions a t the F ermi
energ y “smo othe d out ” by incre asing the
temp erature?
9.5Band Theor y of Solids
19.Wha t are the tw o main appro aches use d to
determine the energ y lev els o f electrons in a
crystal?
20.Describ e tw o features o f energ y lev els f or an
electron in a cr ystal.
21.How do es the numb er o f energ y lev els in a b and
corresp ond to the numb er,N, of atoms .
22.Why are some ma terials v ery good conductors
and others v ery poor c onductors?
23.Why are some ma terials semic onductors?
24.Why do es the resis tanc e of a semic onductor
decre ase as the temp erature incre ases?
9.6Semiconduc tors and Doping
25.Wha t kind o f semic onductor is pro duced if436 9 • Chap ter Re view
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

germanium is dop ed with (a) arsenic , and ( b)
gallium?
26.Wha t kind o f semic onductor is pro duced if
silic on is dop ed with (a) phosphor us, and ( b)
indium?
27.Wha t is the Hall eff ect and wha t is it use d for?
28.For an n-typ e semic onductor , how do impurity
atoms alter the energ y structure o f the solid?
29.For a p-typ e semic onductor , how do impurity
atoms alter the energ y structure o f the solid?
9.7Semiconduc tor De vices
30.When p- and n-typ e ma terials are joine d, wh y is
a unif orm electric field g enera ted ne ar the
junction?
31.When p- and n-typ e ma terials are joine d, wh y
does the depletion la yer not gro w indefinitely?
32.How do y ou kno w if a dio de is in the forwardbiase dconfigura tion?
33.Why do es the rev erse bias c onfigura tion le ad to
a very small current?
34.Wha t happ ens in the e xtreme c ase tha t where
the n- and p-typ e ma terials are he avily dop ed?
35.Explain ho w an a udio amplifier w orks , using the
transis tor c oncept.
9.8Super conduc tivity
36.Describ e tw o main f eatures o f a
superconductor .
37.How do es BCS theor y explain
superconductivity?
38.Wha t is the Meis sner eff ect?
39.Wha t imp act do es an incre asing ma gnetic field
have on the critic al temp erature o f a
semic onductor?
Problems
9.1Types o f Molecular Bonds
40.The electron c onfigura tion o f carbon is
Given this electron c onfigura tion ,
wha t other element might e xhibit the same typ e
of hybridiza tion as c arbon?
41.Potas sium chloride (K Cl) is a molecule f orme d
by an ionic b ond . At equilibrium sep aration the
atoms are apart. Determine the
electros tatic p otential energ y of the a toms .
42.The electron a ffinity o f Cl is 3.89 e V and the
ioniza tion energ y of K is 4.34 e V. Use the
prec eding problem to find the dis sociation
energ y. (Neglect the energ y of repulsion .)
43.The me asure d energ y dis sociated energ y of KCl
is 4.43 e V. Use the results o f the prec eding
problem to determine the energ y of repulsion o f
the ions due to the e xclusion principle .
9.2Molecular Spec tra
44.In a ph ysics la b, you me asure the vibra tional-
rota tional sp ectr um o f HCl . The es tima ted
separation b etween a bsorption p eaks is
. The c entral fre quency o f
the b and is . (a) Wha t is the
moment o f iner tia ( I)? (b) Wha t is the energ y of
vibra tion f or the molecule?
45.For the prec eding problem , find the e quilibrium
separation o f the H and Cl a toms . Comp are this
with the actual v alue .
46.The sep aration b etween o xygen a toms in an
molecule is a bout 0.121 nm . Determine thecharacteris tic energ y of rota tion in e V.
47.The characteris tic energ y of the molecule is
. Determine the sep aration
distanc e between the nitrog en a toms
48.The characteris tic energ y for K Cl is
(a) Determine for the K Cl
molecule . (b) F ind the sep aration dis tanc e
between the K and Cl a toms .
49.A dia tomic molecule is in the state. (a)
Wha t is the energ y of the molecule? ( b) Ho w
much energ y is radia ted in a transition from a
to a state?
50.In a ph ysics la b, you me asure the vibra tional-
rota tional sp ectr um o f potas sium bromide
(KBr). The es tima ted sep aration b etween
absorption p eaks is . The
central fre quency o f the b and is
. (a) Wha t is the moment
of iner tia ( I)? (b) Wha t is the energ y of vibra tion
for the molecule?
9.3Bonding in Cr ystalline Solids
51.The CsI cr ystal s tructure is BC C. The
equilibrium sp acing is appro xima tely
. If ion o ccupies a cubic
volume o f, wha t is the dis tanc e of this ion to
its “ne ares t neighb or” ion?
52.The p otential energ y of a cr ystal is /ion
pair. Find the dis sociation energ y for four moles
of the cr ystal.
53.The me asure d density o f a N aF cr ystal is9 • Chap ter Re view 437

. Wha t is the e quilibrium sep arate
distanc e of and ions?
54.Wha t value o f the repulsion c onstant ,n, giv es
the me asure d dis sociation energ y of 221 k cal/
mole f or N aF?
55.Determine the dis sociation energ y of 12 moles
of sodium chloride (N aCl). ( Hint: the repulsion
constant nis appro xima tely 8.)
56.The me asure d density o f a K Cl cr ystal is
Wha t is the e quilibrium sep aration
distanc e of and ions?
57.Wha t value o f the repulsion c onstant ,n, giv es
the me asure d dis sociation energ y of 171 k cal/
mol f or K Cl?
58.The me asure d density o f a Cs Cl cr ystal is
. Wha t is the e quilibrium sep arate
distanc e of and ions?
9.4Free Elec tron Model o f Metals
59.Wha t is the diff erenc e in energ y between the
state and the s tate with the
next higher energ y? Wha t is the p ercenta ge
chang e in the energ y between the
state and the s tate with the
next higher energ y? (b) C omp are these with the
differenc e in energ y and the p ercenta ge chang e
in the energ y between the
state and the s tate with the ne xt higher energ y.
60.An electron is c onfine d to a metal cub e of
on e ach side . Determine the density
of states a t (a) ; (b) ; and
(c) .
61.Wha t value o f energ y corresp onds to a density
of states o f ?
62.Comp are the density o f states a t 2.5 e V and 0.25
eV.
63.Consider a cub e of copp er with e dges 1.50 mm
long . Estima te the numb er o f electron quantum
states in this cub e whose energies are in the
rang e 3.75 to 3.77 e V.
64.If there is one free electron p er a tom o f copp er,
wha t is the electron numb er density o f this
metal?
65.Determine the F ermi energ y and temp erature
for c opp er a t .
9.5Band Theor y of Solids
66.For a one -dimensional cr ystal, write the la ttice
spacing ( a) in terms o f the electron w avelength .
67.Wha t is the main diff erenc e between an
insula tor and a semic onductor?
68.Wha t is the long est wavelength f or a photon tha tcan e xcite a v alenc e electron into the
conduction b and acros s an energ y gap o f 0.80
eV?
69.A valenc e electron in a cr ystal a bsorbs a photon
of wavelength , . This is jus t
enough energ y to allo w the electron to jump
from the v alenc e band to the c onduction b and .
Wha t is the siz e of the energ y gap?
9.6Semiconduc tors and Doping
70.An e xperiment is p erforme d to demons trate the
Hall eff ect. A thin rectangular s trip o f
semic onductor with width 10 cm and length 30
cm is a ttache d to a b attery and immerse d in a
1.50- Tfield p erpendicular to its sur face. This
produced a Hall v olta ge of 12 V . Wha t is the drift
velocity o f the charg e carriers?
71.Supp ose tha t the cros s-sectional are a of the
strip (the are a of the fac e perpendicular to the
electric current) presente d to the in the
prec eding problem is and the current is
indep endently me asure d to b e 2 mA . Wha t is
the numb er density o f the charg e carriers?
72.A current -carrying c opp er wire with cros s-
section has a drift v elocity o f 0.02
cm/s . Find the total current r unning through
the wire .
73.The Hall eff ect is demons trated in the
laboratory. A thin rectangular s trip o f
semic onductor with width 5 cm and cros s-
sectional are a is attache d to a b attery
and immerse d in a field p erpendicular to its
surface. The Hall v olta ge re ads 12.5 V and the
measure d drift v elocity is 50 m/s . Wha t is the
magnetic field?
9.7Semiconduc tor De vices
74.Sho w tha t forVless than z ero,
75.Ap-ndiode has a rev erse sa tura tion current
. It is f orward biase d so tha t it
has a current o f moving through
it. Wha t bias v olta ge is b eing applie d if the
temp erature is 300 K?
76.The c ollector current o f a transis tor is 3.4 A f or
a base current o f 4.2 mA . Wha t is the current
gain?
77.Applying the p ositiv e end o f a b attery to the
p-side and the neg ative end to the n-side o f ap-
njunction , the me asure d current is
. Reversing this p olarity giv e a
reverse sa tura tion current o f .
Wha t is the temp erature if the bias v olta ge is 1.2438 9 • Chap ter Re view
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

V?
78.The b ase current o f a transis tor is 4.4 A , and its
current g ain 1126. Wha t is the c ollector
current?
9.8Super conduc tivity
79.At wha t temp erature , in terms o f , is the
critic al field o f a sup erconductor one -half its
value a t ?
80.Wha t is the critic al ma gnetic field f or le ad a t
?81.A Pb wire w ound in a tight solenoid o f diameter
of 4.0 mm is c ooled to a temp erature o f 5.0 K .
The wire is c onnecte d in series with a
resis tor and a v aria ble sourc e of emf. As the emf
is incre ased, wha t value do es it ha ve when the
superconductivity o f the wire is des troyed?
82.A tightly w ound solenoid a t 4.0 K is 50 cm long
and is c onstructe d from Nb wire o f radius 1.5
mm . Wha t maximum current c an the solenoid
carry if the wire is to remain sup erconducting?
Additional P roblems
83.Potas sium fluoride (KF) is a molecule f orme d by
an ionic b ond . At equilibrium sep aration the
atoms are apart. Determine the
electros tatic p otential energ y of the a toms . The
electron a ffinity o f F is 3.40 e V and the
ioniza tion energ y of K is 4.34 e V. Determine
dissociation energ y. (Neglect the energ y of
repulsion .)
84.For the prec eding problem , sketch the p otential
energ y versus sep aration graph f or the b onding
of ions . (a) La bel the graph with the
energ y re quire d to trans fer an electron from K
to Fl . (b) La bel the graph with the dis sociation
energ y.
85.The sep aration b etween h ydrog en a toms in a
molecule is a bout 0.075 nm . Determine the
characteris tic energ y of rota tion in e V.
86.The characteris tic energ y of the molecule is
. Determine the sep aration
distanc e between the nitrog en a toms .
87.Determine the lo west three rota tional energ y
levels o f
88.A carbon a tom c an h ybridiz e in the
configura tion . (a) Wha t is the angle b etween the
hybrid orbitals?
89.List fiv e main characteris tics o f ionic cr ystals
that result from their high dis sociation energ y.
90.Why is b onding in favorable? Expres s your
answer in terms o f the s ymmetr y of the electron
wave function .
91.Astronomers claim to find evidenc e of from
light sp ectra o f a dis tant s tar. Do y ou b eliev e
them?
92.Sho w tha t the moment o f iner tia o f a dia tomic
molecule is , where is the re duced
mas s, and is the dis tanc e between the
mas ses.93.Sho w tha t the a verage energ y of an electron in a
one -dimensional metal is rela ted to the F ermi
energ y by
94.Measurements o f a sup erconductor ’s critic al
magnetic field (in T) at various temp eratures (in
K) are giv en b elow. Use a line o f best fit to
determine Assume
T (in K )
3.0 0.18
4.0 0.16
5.0 0.14
6.0 0.12
7.0 0.09
8.0 0.05
9.0 0.01
Table 9.6
95.Estima te the fraction o f Si a toms tha t mus t be
replac ed by As a toms in order to f orm an
impurity b and .
96.Transition in the rota tion sp ectr um are
obser ved at ordinar y ro om temp erature
( ). According to y our la b partner , a
peak in the sp ectr um c orresp onds to a
transition from the to the state. Is
this p ossible? If so , determine the momentum
of iner tia o f the molecule .
97.Determine the F ermi energies f or (a) Mg , (b) N a,
and (c) Zn .9 • Chap ter Re view 439

98.Find the a verage energ y of an electron in a Zn
wire .
99.Wha t value o f the repulsion c onstant ,n, giv es
the me asure d dis sociation energ y of 158 k cal/
mol f or Cs Cl?100 .A ph ysical mo del o f a diamond sugg ests a BC C
packing s tructure . Wh y is this not p ossible?
Challenge P roblems
101 .For an electron in a three -dimensional metal ,
show tha t the a verage energ y is giv en b y
Where Nis the total numb er electrons in the
metal .440 9 • Chap ter Re view
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

INTR ODUCTIONCHAP TER 10
Nuclear Ph ysics
10.1 Proper ties o f Nuclei
10.2 Nuclear Binding Ener gy
10.3 Radioac tive Decay
10.4 Nuclear Reac tions
10.5 Fission
10.6 Nuclear F usion
10.7 Medical Applications and Biological Ef fects of Nuclear Radiation
In this chapter , we study the c omp osition and prop erties o f the a tomic nucleus . The nucleus
lies a t the c enter o f an a tom , and c onsis ts of protons and neutrons . A deep unders tanding o f the nucleus le ads
to numerous v alua ble technologies , including devic es to da te ancient ro cks, map the g alactic arms o f the Milky
Figur e10.1 The Sun is po wered b y nuclear fusion in its c ore. The c ore converts appr oximat ely protons/
second int o helium at a t emper atur e of 14 mil lion K . This pr ocess releases ener gy in the f orm o f phot ons, neutrinos ,
and other par ticles . (credit: modification o f work b y EIT SOHO Consor tium, ESA , NASA)
Chap ter Outline

Way, and g enera te electric al power.
The Sun is the main sourc e of energ y in the solar s ystem . The Sun is 109 Ear th diameters acros s, and ac counts
for more than of the total mas s of the solar s ystem . The Sun shines b y fusing h ydrog en
nuclei—protons —deep inside its interior . Onc e this fuel is sp ent, the Sun will burn helium and , later, other
nuclei . Nucle ar fusion in the Sun is discus sed to ward the end o f this chapter . In the me antime , we will
investigate nucle ar prop erties tha t govern all nucle ar pro cesses, including fusion .
10.1 Proper ties o f Nuclei
Learning Objectiv es
By the end o f this section, y ou wil l be able t o:
•Describe the composition and siz e of an atomic nucleus
•Use a nuclear s ymbol to e xpress the composition o f an atomic nucleus
•Explain why the number o f neutr ons is gr eater than pr otons in heavy nuclei
•Calculate the atomic mass o f an element giv en its iso topes
The atomic nucleus is comp osed ofprotons and neutrons (Figure 10.2 ). Protons and neutrons ha ve
appro xima tely the same mas s, but protons c arry one unit o f positiv e charg e and neutrons c arry no
charg e. These p articles are p acked tog ether into an e xtremely small sp ace at the c enter o f an a tom . According
to sc attering e xperiments , the nucleus is spheric al or ellipsoidal in shap e, and a bout 1/100,000th the siz e of a
hydrog en a tom . If an a tom w ere the siz e of a major le ague b aseb all s tadium , the nucleus w ould b e roughly the
size of the b aseb all. Protons and neutrons within the nucleus are c allednucleons .
Figur e10.2 The at omic nucleus is c omposed o f protons and neutr ons. Protons ar e sho wn in blue , and neutr ons ar e sho wn in r ed.
Counts o f Nucleons
The numb er o f protons in the nucleus is giv en b y the atomic numb er,Z. The numb er o f neutrons in the
nucleus is the neutron numb er,N. The total numb er o f nucleons is the mas s numb er,A. These numb ers are
rela ted by
A nucleus is represente d symb olically b y
where X represents the chemic al element ,Ais the mas s numb er, and Zis the a tomic numb er. For e xample ,
represents the c arbon nucleus with six protons and six neutrons (or 12 nucleons).
A graph o f the numb erNof neutrons v ersus the numb erZof protons f or a rang e of stable nuclei ( nuclide s) is
shown in Figure 10.3 . For a giv en v alue o fZ, multiple v alues o fN(blue p oints) are p ossible . For small v alues o f10.1
10.2442 10 • Nuclear Phy sics
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Z, the numb er o f neutrons e quals the numb er o f protons and the da ta fall on the re d line . For larg e
values o f Z, the numb er o f neutrons is gre ater than the numb er o f protons and the da ta p oints fall
above the re d line . The numb er o f neutrons is g enerally gre ater than the numb er o f protons f or
Figur e10.3 This gr aph plots the number o f neutr ons Nagains t the number o f protons Zfor stable at omic nuclei. L arger nuclei, ha ve mor e
neutr ons than pr otons.
A char t based on this graph tha t pro vides more detaile d inf orma tion a bout e ach nucleus is giv en in Figure
10.4 . This char t is c alled achar t of the nuclides . Each c ell or tile represents a sep arate nucleus . The nuclei are
arrang ed in order o f asc ending Z(along the horiz ontal direction) and asc ending N(along the v ertical
direction).10.1 • P roper ties o f Nuclei 443

Figur e10.4 Partial char t of the nuclides . For stable nuclei (dark blue back grounds), c ell values r epresent the per centag e of nuclei f ound
on Ear th with the same at omic number (per cent abundanc e). F or the uns table nuclei, the number r epresents the half-lif e.
Atoms tha t contain nuclei with the same numb er o f protons ( Z) and diff erent numb ers o f neutrons ( N) are
calledisotop es. For e xample , hydrog en has three isotop es: normal h ydrog en (1 proton , no neutrons),
deuterium (one proton and one neutron), and tritium (one proton and tw o neutrons). Isotop es o f a giv en a tom
share the same chemic al prop erties, sinc e these prop erties are determine d by interactions b etween the outer
electrons o f the a tom , and not the nucleons . For e xample , water tha t contains deuterium ra ther than h ydrog en
(“he avy water”) lo oks and tas tes lik e normal w ater. The f ollowing ta ble sho ws a lis t of common isotop es.
Element Symbol Mass Number Mass (A tomic Mass Units) Percent Abundance *Half-life**
Hydrog enH 1 1.0078 99.99 stable
2 2.0141 0.01 stable
3 3.0160 − 12.32 y
Carbon12 12.0000 98.91 stable
13 13.0034 1.1 stable
14 14.0032 − 5730 y
Nitrog en14 14.0031 99.6 stable
15 15.0001 0.4 stable444 10 • Nuclear Phy sics
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Element Symbol Mass Number Mass (A tomic Mass Units) Percent Abundance *Half-life**
16 16.0061 − 7.13 s
Oxy gen16 15.9949 99.76 stable
17 16.9991 0.04 stable
18 17.9992 0.20 stable
19 19.0035 − 26.46 s
Table 10.1 Common Isotop es *No entr y if les s than 0.001 (trac e amount).
**Sta ble if half -life > 10 sec onds .
Why do neutrons outnumb er protons in he avier nuclei ( Figure 10.5 )? The ans wer to this ques tion re quires an
unders tanding o f forces inside the nucleus . Tw o typ es o f forces e xist: (1) the long-rang e electros tatic
(Coulomb) f orce tha t mak es the p ositiv ely charg ed protons rep el one another; and (2) the shor t-rang estrong
nucle ar forcethat mak es all nucleons in the nucleus a ttract one another . You ma y also ha ve he ard o f a “ weak”
nucle ar force. This f orce is resp onsible f or some nucle ar dec ays, but as the name implies , it do es not pla y a role
in stabilizing the nucleus a gains t the s trong C oulomb repulsion it e xperienc es. We discus s strong nucle ar force
in more detail in the ne xt chapter when w e cover p article ph ysics . Nucle ar stability o ccurs when the a ttractiv e
forces b etween nucleons c omp ensa te for the repulsiv e, long-rang e electros tatic f orces b etween all protons in
the nucleus . For he avy nuclei excess neutrons are nec essary to k eep the electros tatic interactions
from bre aking the nucleus ap art, as sho wn in Figure 10.3 .
Figur e10.5 (a) The electr ostatic f orce is r epulsiv e and has long r ange. The arr ows represent outw ard forces on pr otons (in blue) at the
nuclear sur face by a pr oton (also in blue) at the c enter. (b) The s trong nuclear f orce acts betw een neighboring nucleons . The arr ows
represent at tractiv e forces e xerted b y a neutr on (in r ed) on its near est neighbors .
Because o f the e xistenc e of stable isotop es, we mus t tak e sp ecial c are when quoting the mas s of an element .
For e xample , Copp er (Cu) has tw o stable isotop es:
Given these tw o “versions” o f Cu , wha t is the mas s of this element? The atomic mas sof an element is define d
as the w eighte d average of the mas ses o f its isotop es. Thus , the a tomic mas s of Cu is
The mas s of an individual nucleus is
often e xpres sed in atomic mas s unit s(u), where . (An a tomic mas s unit is define d as
1/12th the mas s of a nucleus .) In a tomic mas s units , the mas s of a helium nucleus ( A = 4 ) is appro xima tely10.1 • P roper ties o f Nuclei 445

4 u. A helium nucleus is also c alled an alpha ( α) particle .
Nuclear Siz e
The simples t mo del o f the nucleus is a densely p acked sphere o f nucleons . The v olume Vof the nucleus is
theref ore prop ortional to the numb er o f nucleons A, expres sed by
where ris the radius of a nucleus and kis a c onstant with units o f volume . Solving f orr, we ha ve
where is a c onstant . For h ydrog en ( ), corresp onds to the radius o f a single proton . Scattering
experiments supp ort this g eneral rela tionship f or a wide rang e of nuclei , and the y imply tha t neutrons ha ve
appro xima tely the same radius as protons . The e xperimentally me asure d value f or is appro xima tely 1.2
femtometer (rec all tha t ).
EXAMPLE 10.1
The Ir on Nucleus
Find the radius ( r) and appro xima te density ( ) of a F e-56 nucleus . Assume the mas s of the F e-56 nucleus is
appro xima tely 56 u .
Strategy
(a) F inding the radius o f is a s traightf orward applic ation o f , giv en (b) T o find the
appro xima te density o f this nucleus , assume the nucleus is spheric al. Calcula te its v olume using the radius
found in p art (a), and then find its density from
Solution
a.The radius o f a nucleus is giv en b y
Subs tituting the v alues f or and Ayields
b.Density is define d to b e which f or a sphere o f radius ris
Subs tituting kno wn v alues giv es
Converting to units o f we find
Significanc e
a.The radius o f the F e-56 nucleus is f ound to b e appro xima tely 5 fm , so its diameter is a bout 10 fm , or
In previous discus sions o f Ruther ford’s scattering e xperiments , a light nucleus w as es tima ted to
be in diameter . Theref ore, the result sho wn f or a mid-siz ed nucleus is re asona ble.
b.The density f ound here ma y seem incre dible . Ho wever, it is c onsis tent with e arlier c omments a bout the
nucleus c ontaining ne arly all o f the mas s of the a tom in a tin y region o f space. One cubic meter o f nucle ar10.3446 10 • Nuclear Phy sics
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

matter has the same mas s as a cub e of water 61 km on e ach side .
CHE CK Y OUR UNDER STANDING 10.1
Nucleus X is tw o times larg er than nucleus Y . Wha t is the ra tio o f their a tomic mas ses?
10.2 Nuclear Binding Ener gy
Learning Objectiv es
By the end o f this section, y ou wil l be able t o:
•Calculate the mass de fect and binding ener gy for a wide r ange o f nuclei
•Use a gr aph o f binding ener gy per nucleon (BEN) v ersus mass number graph to assess the r elativ e
stabilit y of a nucleus
•Compar e the binding ener gy o f a nucleon in a nucleus to the ioniz ation ener gy o f an elec tron in an atom
The f orces tha t bind nucleons tog ether in an a tomic nucleus are much gre ater than those tha t bind an electron
to an a tom through electros tatic a ttraction . This is evident b y the rela tive siz es o f the a tomic nucleus and the
atom resp ectiv ely). The energ y re quire d to pr y a nucleon from the nucleus is theref ore
much larg er than tha t require d to remo ve (or ioniz e) an electron in an a tom . In g eneral , all nucle ar chang es
involve larg e amounts o f energ y per p article underg oing the re action . This has numerous practic al
applic ations .
Mass De fect
According to nucle ar p article e xperiments , the total mas s of a nucleus islessthan the sum o f the
mas ses o f its c onstituent nucleons (protons and neutrons). The mas s diff erenc e, ormas s def ect, is giv en b y
where is the total mas s of the protons , is the total mas s of the neutrons , and is the mas s
of the nucleus . According to Eins tein ’s sp ecial theor y of rela tivity , mas s is a me asure o f the total energ y of a
system ( ). Thus , the total energ y of a nucleus is les s than the sum o f the energies o f its c onstituent
nucleons . The f orma tion o f a nucleus from a s ystem o f isola ted protons and neutrons is theref ore an
exothermic re action—me aning tha t it rele ases energ y. The energ y emit ted, or radia ted, in this pro cess is
Now ima gine this pro cess occurs in rev erse . Ins tead o f forming a nucleus , energ y is put into the s ystem to
break ap art the nucleus ( Figure 10.6 ). The amount o f energ y re quire d is c alled the total binding ener gy (BE) ,
Exp erimental results indic ate tha t the binding energ y for a nucleus with mas s numb er is roughly
prop ortional to the total numb er o f nucleons in the nucleus ,A. The binding energ y of a ma gnesium nucleus
( ), for e xample , is appro xima tely tw o times gre ater than f or the c arbon nucleus ( ).10.4
Binding Ener gy
The binding energ y is e qual to the amount o f energ y rele ased in f orming the nucleus , and is theref ore
given b y
10.510.2 • Nuclear Binding Ener gy 447

Figur e10.6 The binding ener gy is the ener gy requir ed to break a nucleus int o its c onstituent pr otons and neutr ons. A s ystem o f separ ated
nucleons has a gr eater mas s than a s ystem o f bound nucleons .
EXAMPLE 10.2
Mas s Def ect and Binding Ener gy of the Deut eron
Calcula te the mas s def ect and the binding energ y of the deuteron . The mas s of the deuteron is
or
Solution
From Equa tion 10.4 , the mas s def ect f or the deuteron is
The binding energ y of the deuteron is then
Over tw o million electron v olts are nee ded to bre ak ap art a deuteron into a proton and a neutron . This v ery
larg e value indic ates the gre at strength o f the nucle ar force. By comp arison , the gre atest amount o f energ y
require d to lib erate an electron b ound to a h ydrog en a tom b y an a ttractiv e Coulomb f orce (an electroma gnetic
force) is a bout 10 e V.
Graph o f Binding Ener gy per Nucleon
In nucle ar ph ysics , one o f the mos t imp ortant e xperimental quantities is the binding ener gy per nucleon
(BEN) , which is define d by
This quantity is the a verage energ y re quire d to remo ve an individual nucleon from a nucleus —analog ous to the
ioniza tion energ y of an electron in an a tom . If the BEN is rela tively larg e, the nucleus is rela tively s table. BEN
values are es tima ted from nucle ar sc attering e xperiments .
A graph o f binding energ y per nucleon v ersus mas s numb erAis giv en in Figure 10.7 . This graph is c onsidere d
by man y ph ysicis ts to b e one o f the mos t imp ortant graphs in ph ysics . Tw o notes are in order . First, typic al
BEN v alues rang e from 6–10 Me V, with an a verage value o f about 8 Me V. In other w ords , it tak es sev eral million
electron v olts to pr y a nucleon from a typic al nucleus , as c omp ared to jus t 13.6 e V to ioniz e an electron in the
ground s tate of hydrog en. This is wh y nucle ar force is ref erre d to as the “ strong ” nucle ar force.
Second , the graph rises a t lowA, peaks v ery ne ar iron and then tap ers o ff at high A. The p eak
value sugg ests tha t the iron nucleus is the mos t stable nucleus in na ture (it is also wh y nucle ar fusion in the
cores o f stars ends with F e). The re ason the graph rises and tap ers o ff has to do with c omp eting f orces in the10.6448 10 • Nuclear Phy sics
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

nucleus . At low values o fA, attractiv e nucle ar forces b etween nucleons domina te over repulsiv e electros tatic
forces b etween protons . But at high v alues o fA, repulsiv e electros tatic f orces b etween f orces b egin to
domina te, and these f orces tend to bre ak ap art the nucleus ra ther than hold it tog ether .
Figur e10.7 In this gr aph o f binding ener gy per nucleon f or stable nuclei, the BEN is gr eatest for nuclei with a mas s near . Ther efore,
fusion o f nuclei with mas s numbers much les s than that o f Fe, and fis sion o f nuclei with mas s numbers gr eater than that o f Fe, are
exothermic pr ocesses.
As w e will see , the BEN-v ersus -Agraph implies tha t nuclei divide d or c ombine d rele ase an enormous amount
of energ y. This is the b asis f or a wide rang e of phenomena, from the pro duction o f electricity a t a nucle ar
power plant to sunlight .
EXAMPLE 10.3
Tightl y Bound Alpha Nuclides
Calcula te the binding energ y per nucleon o f an .
Strategy
Determine the total binding energ y (BE) using the e qua tion where is the mas s def ect. The
binding energ y per nucleon (BEN) is BE divide d byA.
Solution
For , we ha ve The total binding energ y is
These mas ses are and Thus w e ha ve,
Noting tha t we find10.2 • Nuclear Binding Ener gy 449

Sinc e the total binding energ y per nucleon is
Significanc e
Notice tha t the binding energ y per nucleon f or is much gre ater than f or the h ydrog en isotop es
Theref ore, helium nuclei c annot bre ak do wn h ydrog en isotop es without energ y
being put into the s ystem .
CHE CK Y OUR UNDER STANDING 10.2
If the binding energ y per nucleon is larg e, does this mak e it harder or e asier to s trip o ff a nucleon from a
nucleus?
10.3 Radioac tive Decay
Learning Objectiv es
By the end o f this section, y ou wil l be able t o:
•Describe the decay o f a radioac tive subs tance in terms o f its decay cons tant and half -life
•Use the r adioac tive decay law to es timate the age o f a subs tance
•Explain the natur al pr ocesses that allo w the dating o f living tissue using
In 1896, Antoine Becquerel disc overed tha t a uranium-rich ro ck emits in visible ra ys tha t can dark en a
photographic pla te in an enclose d container . Scientis ts offer three arguments f or the nucle ar origin o f these
rays. First, the eff ects o f the radia tion do not v ary with chemic al state; tha t is, whether the emit ting ma terial is
in the f orm o f an element or c omp ound . Sec ond , the radia tion do es not v ary with chang es in temp erature or
pres sure —both factors tha t in sufficient degree c an a ffect electrons in an a tom . Third , the v ery larg e energ y of
the in visible ra ys (up to hundre ds o f eV) is not c onsis tent with a tomic electron transitions (only a f ew e V).
Today, this radia tion is e xplaine d by the c onversion o f mas s into energ y deep within the nucleus o f an a tom .
The sp ontaneous emis sion o f radia tion from nuclei is c alled nucle arradio activity(Figure 10.8 ).
Figur e10.8 The int ernational ionizing r adiation s ymbol is univ ersal ly recogniz ed as the w arning s ymbol f or nuclear r adiation.
Radioac tive Decay L aw
When an individual nucleus trans forms into another with the emis sion o f radia tion , the nucleus is said to
decay. Radio activ e dec ay occurs f or all nuclei with and also f or some uns table isotop es with
The dec ay ra te is prop ortional to the numb er o f original (undec ayed) nuclei Nin a subs tanc e. The numb er o f
nuclei los t to dec ay, in time inter valdt, is writ ten
10.7450 10 • Nuclear Phy sics
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

where is called the decay cons tant . (The minus sign indic ates the numb er o f original nuclei decre ases o ver
time .) In other w ords , the more nuclei a vailable to dec ay, the more tha t do dec ay (in time dt). This e qua tion c an
be rewrit ten as
Integra ting b oth sides o f the e qua tion , and defining to b e the numb er o f nuclei a t , we obtain
This giv es us
Taking the left and right sides o f the e qua tion as a p ower o fe, we ha ve the radio active dec ay law.
The total numb er o f nuclei drops v ery rapidly a t firs t, and then more slo wly ( Figure 10.9 ).
Figur e10.9 A plot o f the r adioactiv e deca y law demons trates that the number o f nuclei r emaining in a deca y sample dr ops dr amatical ly
during the firs t moments o f deca y.
The half -life of a radio activ e subs tanc e is define d as the time f or half o f the original nuclei to dec ay (or
the time a t which half o f the original nuclei remain). The half -lives o f uns table isotop es are sho wn in the char t
of nuclides in Figure 10.4 . The numb er o f radio activ e nuclei remaining a fter an integ er (n) numb er o f half -lives
is theref ore
If the dec ay constant ( ) is larg e, the half -life is small , and vic e versa. T o determine the rela tionship b etween10.8
10.9
10.10
Radioac tive Decay L aw
The total numb erNof radio activ e nuclei remaining a fter time tis
where is the dec ay constant f or the p articular nucleus .10.11
10.1210.3 • Radioac tive Decay 451

these quantities , note tha t when , then . Thus ,Equa tion 10.10 can b e rewrit ten as
Dividing b oth sides b y and taking the na tural log arithm yields
which re duces to
Thus , if w e kno w the half -lifeT1/2 of a radio activ e subs tanc e, we can find its dec ay constant . The lifetime of a
radio activ e subs tanc e is define d as the a verage amount o f time tha t a nucleus e xists before dec aying . The
lifetime o f a subs tanc e is jus t the recipro cal of the dec ay constant , writ ten as
The activityAis define d as the ma gnitude o f the dec ay ra te, or
The infinitesimal chang edNin the time inter valdtis neg ative because the numb er o f parent (undec ayed)
particles is decre asing , so the activity ( A) is p ositiv e. Defining the initial activity as , we ha ve
Thus , the activity Aof a radio activ e subs tanc e decre ases e xponentially with time ( Figure 10.10 ).
Figur e10.10 (a) A plot o f the activity as a function o f time (b) If w e measur e the activity at diff erent times , we can plot ln Aversus t, and
obtain a s traight line .10.13
10.14
10.15
10.16
10.17
10.18452 10 • Nuclear Phy sics
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

EXAMPLE 10.4
Deca y Cons tant and Activity o f Strontium-90
The half -life of strontium-90, , is 28.8 y . Find (a) its dec ay constant and ( b) the initial activity o f 1.00 g o f
the ma terial .
Strategy
We can find the dec ay constant directly from Equa tion 10.15 . To determine the activity , we firs t nee d to find the
numb er o f nuclei present .
Solution
a.The dec ay constant is f ound to b e
b.The a tomic mas s of is 89.91 g . Using A vogadro ’s numb er atoms /mol , we find the
initial numb er o f nuclei in 1.00 g o f the ma terial:
From this , we find tha t the activity at for 1.00 g o f strontium-90 is
Expres sing in terms o f the half -life of the subs tanc e, we get
Theref ore, the activity is halv ed after one half -life. We can determine the dec ay constant by me asuring the
activity as a function o f time . Taking the na tural log arithm o f the left and right sides o fEqua tion 10.17 , we get
This e qua tion f ollows the line ar form . If w e plot ln Aversus t, we expect a s traight line with slop e
and y-interc ept (Figure 10.10 (b)). A ctivity Ais expres sed in units o fbecquerels (Bq), where one
. This quantity c an also b e expres sed in dec ays per minute or dec ays per year. One o f
the mos t common units f or activity is the curie (Ci) , define d to b e the activity o f 1 g o f . The rela tionship
between the Bq and Ci is
EXAMPLE 10.5
Wha t is Activity in Living Tis sue?
Appro xima tely of the human b ody b y mas s is c arbon. Calcula te the activity due to in 1.00 k g of carbon
found in a living org anism . Expres s the activity in units o f Bq and Ci .
Strategy
The activity o f is determine d using the e qua tion , where λis the dec ay constant and is the
numb er o f radio activ e nuclei . The numb er o f nuclei in a 1.00-k g sample is determine d in tw o steps . First,
we determine the numb er o f nuclei using the c oncept o f a mole . Sec ond , we multiply this v alue b y10.19
10.2010.3 • Radioac tive Decay 453

(the kno wn a bundanc e of in a c arbon sample from a living org anism) to determine the
numb er o f nuclei in a living org anism . The dec ay constant is determine d from the kno wn half -life of
(available from Figure 10.4 ).
Solution
One mole o f carbon has a mas s of 12.0 g , sinc e it is ne arly pure . Thus , the numb er o f carbon nuclei in a
kilogram is
The numb er o f nuclei in 1 k g of carbon is theref ore
Now w e can find the activity Aby using the e qua tion Entering kno wn v alues giv es us
or decays per year. To convert this to the unit Bq , we simply c onvert years to sec onds . Thus ,
or 250 dec ays per sec ond . To expres sAin curies , we use the definition o f a curie ,
Thus ,
Significanc e
Appro xima tely of the human b ody b y weight is c arbon. Hundre ds o f decays tak e plac e in the human
body ev ery sec ond . Carbon-14 and other na turally o ccurring radio activ e subs tanc es in the b ody c omp ose a
person ’s background e xposure to nucle ar radia tion . As w e will see la ter in this chapter , this activity lev el is w ell
below the maximum rec ommende d dosa ges.
Radioac tive Dating
Radio active dat ing is a technique tha t uses na turally o ccurring radio activity to determine the a ge of a
material , such as a ro ck or an ancient ar tifact . The b asic appro ach is to es tima te the original numb er o f nuclei
in a ma terial and the present numb er o f nuclei in the ma terial (a fter dec ay), and then use the kno wn v alue o f
the dec ay constant and Equa tion 10.10 to calcula te the total time o f the dec ay,t.
An imp ortant metho d ofradio activ e da ting iscarbon-14 dat ing. Carbon-14 nuclei are pro duced when high-
energ y solar radia tion s trikes nuclei in the upp er a tmosphere and subse quently dec ay with a half -life of
5730 y ears. Radio activ e carbon has the same chemis try as s table c arbon, so it c ombines with the ec osphere
and ev entually b ecomes p art of every living org anism . Carbon-14 has an a bundanc e of 1.3 p arts per trillion o f
normal c arbon. Theref ore, if y ou kno w the numb er o f carbon nuclei in an object , you multiply tha t numb er b y
to find the numb er o f nuclei in tha t object . When an org anism dies , carbon e xchang e with the
environment c eases , and is not replenishe d as it dec ays.
By comp aring the a bundanc e of in an ar tifact , such as mumm y wrappings , with the normal a bundanc e in
living tis sue, it is p ossible to determine the mumm y’s age (or the time sinc e the p erson ’s de ath). C arbon-14
dating c an b e use d for biologic al tis sues as old as 50,000 y ears, but is g enerally mos t accura te for y oung er
samples , sinc e the a bundanc e of nuclei in them is gre ater. Very old biologic al ma terials c ontain no at454 10 • Nuclear Phy sics
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

all. The v alidity o f carbon da ting c an b e check ed by other me ans, such as b y his toric al kno wledge or b y tree -
ring c ounting .
EXAMPLE 10.6
An Ancient Burial Ca ve
In an ancient burial c ave, your te am o f archaeologis ts disc overs ancient w ood furniture . Only of the
original remains in the w ood. Ho w old is the furniture?
Strategy
The problem s tatement implies tha t Theref ore, the e qua tion can b e use d to find
the pro duct ,. We kno w the half -life of is 5730 y , so w e also kno w the dec ay constant , and theref ore the
total dec ay time t.
Solution
Solving the e qua tion for gives us
Thus ,
Taking the na tural log arithm o f both sides o f the e qua tion yields
so tha t
Rearranging the e qua tion to isola tetgives us
where
Combining this inf orma tion yields
Significanc e
The furniture is almos t 2000 y ears old—an impres sive disc overy. The typic al unc ertainty on c arbon-14 da ting
is about , so the furniture is an ywhere b etween 1750 and 1950 y ears old . This da te rang e mus t be
confirme d by other evidenc e, such as his toric al rec ords .
CHE CK Y OUR UNDER STANDING 10.3
A radio activ e nuclide has a high dec ay ra te. Wha t do es this me an f or its half -life and activity?
INTER ACTIVE
Visit the Radio activ e Da ting G ame (https:/ /openstax.org/l/21radda tgame) to le arn a bout the typ es o f10.3 • Radioac tive Decay 455

radiometric da ting and tr y your hand a t dating some ancient objects .
10.4 Nuclear Reac tions
Learning Objectiv es
By the end o f this section, y ou wil l be able t o:
•Describe and compar e thr ee types o f nuclear r adiation
•Use nuclear s ymbols to describe changes that occur during nuclear r eactions
•Describe pr ocesses inv olved in the decay series o f heavy elements
Early e xperiments rev ealed three typ es o f nucle ar “ra ys” or radia tion: alpha ( ) rays,beta ( ) rays, and
gamma ( ) rays. These three typ es o f radia tion are diff erentia ted by their a bility to p enetra te ma tter. Alpha
radia tion is b arely a ble to p ass through a thin sheet o f paper. Beta radia tion c an p enetra te aluminum to a depth
of about 3 mm , and g amma radia tion c an p enetra te le ad to a depth o f 2 or more c entimeters ( Figure 10.11 ).
Figur e10.11 A comparison o f the penetr ation dep ths o f alpha ( ), beta ( ), and g amma ( ) radiation thr ough v arious mat erials .
The electric al prop erties o f these three typ es o f radia tion are in vestigated by passing them through a unif orm
magnetic field , as sho wn in Figure 10.12 . According to the ma gnetic f orce equa tion positiv ely
charg ed particles are deflecte d up ward, neg atively charg ed particles are deflecte d do wnward, and p articles
with no charg e pass through the ma gnetic field undeflecte d. Eventually ,rays were identifie d with helium
nuclei rays with electrons and positrons (positiv ely charg ed electrons or antielectrons ), and rays
with high-energ y photons . We discus s alpha, b eta, and g amma radia tion in detail in the remainder o f this
section .456 10 • Nuclear Phy sics
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Figur e10.12 The eff ect o f a magnetic field on alpha ( ), beta ( ), and g amma ( ) radiation. This fig ure is a schematic onl y. The r elativ e
paths o f the par ticles depend on their mas ses and initial kinetic ener gies .
Alpha Decay
Heavy uns table nuclei emit radia tion . In -particle dec ay (or alpha dec ay), the nucleus loses tw o protons and
two neutrons , so the a tomic numb er decre ases b y tw o, where as its mas s numb er decre ases b y four. Bef ore the
decay, the nucleus is c alled the parent nucleus . The nucleus or nuclei pro duced in the dec ay are ref erre d to as
the daughter nucleus or da ughter nuclei . We represent an decay symb olically b y
where is the p arent nucleus , is the da ughter nucleus , and is the particle . In decay, a nucleus
of atomic numb erZdecays into a nucleus o f atomic numb er and a tomic mas s Interes tingly , the
dream o f the ancient alchemis ts to turn other metals into g old is scientific ally f easible through the alpha-dec ay
process. The eff orts of the alchemis ts faile d because the y relie d on chemic al interactions ra ther than nucle ar
interactions .
INTER ACTIVE
Watch alpha p articles esc ape from a p olonium nucleus , causing radio activ e alpha dec ay. See ho w random
decay times rela te to the half -life. To try a simula tion o f alpha dec ay, visit alpha p articles (https:/ /openstax.org/
l/21alphap arvid)
An e xample o f alpha dec ay is uranium-238:
The a tomic numb er has dropp ed from 92 to 90. The chemic al element with is thorium . Henc e,
Uranium-238 has dec ayed to Thorium-234 b y the emis sion o f an particle , writ ten
Subse quently , decays byemis sion with a half -life of 24 da ys. The energ y rele ased in this alpha dec ay
takes the f orm o f kinetic energies o f the thorium and helium nuclei , although the kinetic energ y of thorium is
smaller than helium due to its he avier mas s and smaller v elocity.10.2110.4 • Nuclear Reac tions 457

EXAMPLE 10.7
Plut onium Alpha Deca y
Find the energ y emit ted in the decay of .
Strategy
The energ y emit ted in the decay of can b e found using the e qua tion We mus t firs t find
the diff erenc e in mas s between the p arent nucleus and the pro ducts o f the dec ay.
Solution
The dec ay equa tion is
Thus , the p ertinent mas ses are those o f , , and the particle or , all o f which are kno wn. The
initial mas s was The final mas s is the sum
Thus ,
Now w e can find Eby entering into the e qua tion:
We kno w so w e ha ve
Significanc e
The energ y rele ased in this decay is in the Me V rang e, man y times gre ater than chemic al re action energies .
Mos t of this energ y becomes kinetic energ y of the particle (or nucleus), which mo ves a way at high sp eed.
The energ y carrie d away by the rec oil o f the nucleus is much smaller due to its rela tively larg e mas s. The
nucleus c an b e left in an e xcited state to la ter emit photons ( rays).
Beta Decay
In mos tparticle dec ays (or beta dec ay), either an electron ( ) or p ositron ( ) is emit ted by a nucleus . A
positron has the same mas s as the electron , but its charg e is . For this re ason , a p ositron is sometimes
called an antielectron . Ho w do es decay occur? A p ossible e xplana tion is the electron (p ositron) is c onfine d to
the nucleus prior to the dec ay and someho w esc apes. To obtain a rough es tima te of the esc ape energ y, consider
a simplifie d mo del o f an electron trapp ed in a b ox (or in the terminolog y of quantum mechanics , a one -
dimensional square w ell) tha t has the width o f a typic al nucleus ( ). According to the Heisenb erg
unc ertainty principle inQuantum Mechanics , the unc ertainty o f the momentum o f the electron is:458 10 • Nuclear Phy sics
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Taking this momentum v alue (an underes tima te) to b e the “ true v alue ,” the kinetic energ y of the electron on
escape is appro xima tely
Exp erimentally , the electrons emit ted in decay are f ound to ha ve kinetic energies o f the order o f only a f ew
MeV. We theref ore c onclude tha t the electron is someho w pro duced in the dec ay ra ther than esc aping the
nucleus . Particle pro duction (annihila tion) is describ ed by theories tha t combine quantum mechanics and
rela tivity , a subject o f a more adv anced course in ph ysics .
Nucle ar b eta dec ay involves the c onversion o f one nucleon into another . For e xample , a neutron c an dec ay to a
proton b y the emis sion o f an electron ( ) and a ne arly mas sles s particle c alled an antineutrino ():
The nota tion is use d to designa te the electron . Its mas s numb er is 0 b ecause it is not a nucleon , and its
atomic numb er is to signif y tha t it has a charg e of . The proton is represente d by because its mas s
numb er and a tomic numb er are 1. When this o ccurs within an a tomic nucleus , we ha ve the f ollowing e qua tion
for b eta dec ay:
As discus sed in another chapter , this pro cess occurs due to the w eak nucle ar force.
INTER ACTIVE
Watchbeta dec ay(https:/ /openstax.org/l/21b etadec ayvid) occur f or a c ollection o f nuclei or f or an individual
nucleus .
As an e xample , the isotop e is uns table and dec ays by emis sion with a half -life of 24 da ys. Its dec ay
can b e represente d as
Sinc e the chemic al element with a tomic numb er 91 is protactinium (P a), w e can write the decay of thorium
as
The rev erse pro cess is also p ossible: A proton c an dec ay to a neutron b y the emis sion o f a p ositron ( ) and a
nearly mas sles s particle c alled aneutrino (v). This re action is writ ten as
The p ositron is emit ted with the neutrino v, and the neutron remains in the nucleus . (Lik e decay, the
positron do es not prec ede the dec ay but is pro duced in the dec ay.) For an isola ted proton , this pro cess is
imp ossible b ecause the neutron is he avier than the proton . Ho wever, this pro cess is p ossible within the
nucleus b ecause the proton c an rec eive energ y from other nucleons f or the transition . As an e xample , the
isotop e of aluminum decays by emis sion with a half -life of The dec ay is writ ten as
The a tomic numb er 12 c orresp onds to ma gnesium . Henc e,
As a nucle ar re action , positron emis sion c an b e writ ten as10.2210.4 • Nuclear Reac tions 459

The neutrino w as not detecte d in the e arly e xperiments on decay. Ho wever, the la ws of energ y and
momentum seeme d to re quire such a p article . Later, neutrinos w ere detecte d through their interactions with
nuclei .
EXAMPLE 10.8
Bismuth Alpha and Beta Deca y
The nucleus underg oes b oth and decay. For e ach c ase, wha t is the da ughter nucleus?
Strategy
We can use the pro cesses describ ed byEqua tion 10.21 and Equa tion 10.22 , as w ell as the P erio dic T able, to
identif y the resulting elements .
Solution
The a tomic numb er and the mas s numb er for the particle are 2 and 4, resp ectiv ely. Thus , when a
bismuth-211 nucleus emits an particle , the da ughter nucleus has an a tomic numb er o f 81 and a mas s
numb er o f 207. The element with an a tomic numb er o f 81 is thallium , so the dec ay is giv en b y
In decay, the a tomic numb er incre ases b y 1, while the mas s numb er stays the same . The element with an
atomic numb er o f 84 is p olonium , so the dec ay is giv en b y
CHE CK Y OUR UNDER STANDING 10.4
In radio activ e beta dec ay, does the a tomic mas s numb er,A, incre ase or decre ase?
Gamma Decay
A nucleus in an e xcited state can dec ay to a lo wer-lev el state by the emis sion o f a “ gamma-ra y” photon , and
this is kno wn as gamma dec ay. This is analog ous to de -excitation o f an a tomic electron . Gamma dec ay is
represente d symb olically b y
where the as terisk (*) on the nucleus indic ates an e xcited state. In decay, neither the a tomic numb er nor the
mas s numb er chang es, so the typ e of nucleus do es not chang e.
Radioac tive Decay Series
Nuclei with are uns table and dec ay na turally . Man y of these nuclei ha ve very shor t lifetimes , so the y
are not f ound in na ture . Notable e xceptions include (or Th-232) with a half -life of years,
and (or U -238) with a half -life of years. When a he avy nucleus dec ays to a lighter one , the
lighter da ughter nucleus c an b ecome the p arent nucleus f or the ne xt dec ay, and so on . This pro cess can
produce a long series o f nucle ar dec ays called adecay series . The series ends with a s table nucleus .
To illus trate the c oncept o f a dec ay series , consider the dec ay of Th-232 series ( Figure 10.13 ). The neutron
numb er,N, is plot ted on the v erticaly-axis , and the a tomic numb er,Z, is plot ted on the horiz ontal x-axis , so
Th-232 is f ound a t the c oordina tes Th-232 dec ays byemis sion with a half -life of
years. Alpha dec ay decre ases the a tomic numb er b y 2 and the mas s numb er b y 4, so w e ha ve10.23
10.24460 10 • Nuclear Phy sics
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

The neutron numb er for Radium-228 is 140, so it is f ound in the dia gram a t the c oordina tes
Radium-228 is also uns table and dec ays by emis sion with a half -life of 5.76 y ears to
Actinum-228. The a tomic numb er incre ases b y 1, the mas s numb er remains the same , and the neutron
numb er decre ases b y 1. N otice tha t in the graph ,emis sion app ears as a line sloping do wnward to the left ,
with b oth Nand Zdecre asing b y 2. Beta emis sion , on the other hand , app ears as a line sloping do wnward to
the right with Ndecre asing b y 1, and Zincre asing b y 1. After sev eral additional alpha and b eta dec ays, the
series ends with the s table nucleus Pb -208.
The rela tive fre quency o f diff erent typ es o f radio activ e dec ays (alpha, b eta, and g amma) dep ends on man y
factors , including the s trength o f the f orces in volved and the numb er o f ways a giv en re action c an o ccur
without viola ting the c onser vation o f energ y and momentum . Ho w often a radio activ e dec ay occurs o ften
dep ends on a sensitiv e balanc e of the s trong and electroma gnetic f orces. These f orces are discus sed in Particle
Physics and C osmolog y.
Figur e10.13 In the thorium deca y series , alpha deca ys reduc e the at omic number , as indicat ed b y the r ed arr ows. Beta ( )
deca ys incr ease the at omic number , as indicat ed b y the blue arr ows. The series ends at the s table nucleus Pb -208.
As another e xample , consider the U -238 dec ay series sho wn in Figure 10.14 . After numerous alpha and b eta
decays, the series ends with the s table nucleus Pb -206. An e xample o f a dec ay whose p arent nucleus no long er
exists na turally is sho wn in Figure 10.15 . It s tarts with N eptunium-237 and ends in the s table nucleus
Bismuth-209. N eptunium is c alled atransuranic element because it lies b eyond uranium in the p erio dic
table. Uranium has the highes t atomic numb er of an y element f ound in na ture . Elements with
can b e pro duced only in the la boratory. The y mos t prob ably also e xisted in na ture a t the time o f the
forma tion o f Ear th, but b ecause o f their rela tively shor t lifetimes , the y ha ve completely dec ayed. There is10.4 • Nuclear Reac tions 461

nothing fundamentally diff erent b etween na turally o ccurring and ar tificial elements .
Figur e10.14 In the Ur anium-238 deca y series , alpha ( ) deca ys reduc e the at omic number , as indicat ed b y the r ed arr ows. Beta ( )
deca ys incr ease the at omic number , as indicat ed b y the blue arr ows. The series ends at the s table nucleus Pb -206.
Notice tha t for Bi (21), the dec ay ma y pro ceed through either alpha or b eta dec ay.462 10 • Nuclear Phy sics
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Figur e10.15 In the Nep tunium-237 deca y series , alpha ( ) deca ys reduc e the at omic number , as indicat ed b y the r ed arr ows. Beta ( )
deca ys incr ease the at omic number , as indicat ed b y the blue arr ows. The series ends at the s table nucleus Bi-209.
Radioac tivity in the Ear th
According to g eologis ts, if there w ere no he at sourc e, Ear th should ha ve cooled to its present temp erature in no
more than 1 billion y ears. Yet, Ear th is more than 4 billion y ears old . Wh y is Ear th cooling so slo wly? The
answer is nucle ar radio activity , tha t is, high-energ y particles pro duced in radio activ e dec ays he at Ear th from
the inside ( Figure 10.16 ).10.4 • Nuclear Reac tions 463

Figur e10.16 Earth is heat ed b y nuclear r eactions (alpha , beta , and g amma deca ys). Without these r eactions , Ear th’s core and mantle
would be much c ooler than it is no w.
Candida te nuclei f or this he ating mo del are , which p ossess half -lives similar to or long er than
the a ge of Ear th. The energ y pro duced by these dec ays (per sec ond p er cubic meter) is small , but the energ y
cannot esc ape easily , so Ear th’s core is v ery hot . Thermal energ y in Ear th’s core is trans ferre d to Ear th’s
surface and a way from it through the pro cesses o f convection , conduction , and radia tion .
10.5 Fission
Learning Objectiv es
By the end o f this section, y ou wil l be able t o:
•Describe the pr ocess o f nuclear fission in terms o f its pr oduc t and r eactants
•Calculate the ener gies o f par ticles pr oduced b y a fission r eaction
•Explain the fission concep t in the conte xt of fission bombs and nuclear r eactions
In 1934, Enric oFermi bomb arde d chemic al elements with neutrons in order to cre ate isotop es o f other
elements . He as sume d tha t bomb arding uranium with neutrons w ould mak e it uns table and pro duce a new
element . Unf ortuna tely, Fermi c ould not determine the pro ducts o f the re action . Sev eral y ears la ter, OttoHahn
and F ritz Stras sman repro duced these e xperiments and disc overed tha t the pro ducts o f these re actions w ere
smaller nuclei . From this , the y conclude d tha t the uranium nucleus had split into tw o smaller nuclei .
The split ting o f a nucleus is c alledfission . Interes tingly , U-235 fis sion do es not alw ays pro duce the same
fragments . Example fis sion re actions include:
In e ach c ase, the sum o f the mas ses o f the pro duct nuclei are les s than the mas ses o f the re actants , so the
fission o f uranium is an e xothermic pro cess This is the ide a behind the use o f fission re actors as464 10 • Nuclear Phy sics
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

sourc es o f energ y (Figure 10.17 ). The energ y carrie d away by the re action tak es the f orm o f particles with
kinetic energ y. The p ercent yield o f fra gments from a U -235 fis sion is giv en in Figure 10.18 .
Figur e10.17 The Phil lipsbur g Nuclear P ower Plant in German y uses a fis sion r eact or to gener ate electricity .
Figur e10.18 In this gr aph o f fission fr agments fr om U-235, the peak s in the gr aph indicat e nuclei that ar e produc ed in the gr eatest
abundanc e by the fis sion pr ocess.
Energ y chang es in a nucle ar fis sion re action c an b e unders tood in terms o f the binding energ y per nucleon
curve (Figure 10.7 ). The BEN v alue f or uranium is slightly lo wer than its da ughter nuclei , which lie
closer to the iron (F e) peak. This me ans tha t nucleons in the nucle ar fra gments are more tightly b ound than10.5 • Fission 465

those in the U -235 nucleus . Theref ore, a fis sion re action results in a drop in the a verage energ y of a nucleon .
This energ y is c arrie d away by high-energ y neutrons .
Niels Bohr and J ohn Wheeler develop ed the liquid drop mo del to unders tand the fis sion pro cess. According to
this mo del, firing a neutron a t a nucleus is analog ous to dis turbing a droplet o f water ( Figure 10.19 ). The
analog y works b ecause shor t-rang e forces b etween nucleons in a nucleus are similar to the a ttractiv e forces
between w ater molecules in a w ater droplet . In p articular , forces b etween nucleons a t the sur face of the
nucleus result in a sur face tension similar to tha t of a w ater droplet . A neutron fire d into a uranium nucleus
can set the nucleus into vibra tion . If this vibra tion is violent enough , the nucleus divides into smaller nuclei
and also emits tw o or three individual neutrons .
Figur e10.19 In the liquid dr op model o f nuclear fis sion, the ur anium nucleus is split int o tw o light er nuclei b y a high-ener gy neutr on.
U-235 fis sion c an pro duce achain re action . In a c omp ound c onsis ting o f man y U-235 nuclei , neutrons in the
decay of one U -235 nucleus c an initia te the fis sion o f additional U -235 nuclei ( Figure 10.20 ). This chain
reaction c an pro ceed in a c ontrolle d manner , as in a nucle ar re actor a t a p ower plant , or pro ceed
unc ontrolla bly, as in an e xplosion .466 10 • Nuclear Phy sics
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Figur e10.20 In a U-235 fis sion chain r eaction, the fis sion o f the ur anium nucleus pr oduc es high-ener gy neutr ons that g o on t o split mor e
nuclei. The ener gy released in this pr ocess can be used t o produc e electricity .
INTER ACTIVE
View a simula tion on nucle ar fis sion (https:/ /openstax.org/l/21nuclr fissvid) to start a chain re action , or
intro duce nonradio activ e isotop es to prev ent one . Control energ y pro duction in a nucle ar re actor .
The A tomic Bomb
The p ossibility o f a chain re action in uranium , with its e xtremely larg e energ y rele ase, led nucle ar scientis ts to
conceive of making a b omb —an atomic b omb . (These disc overies w ere taking plac e in the y ears jus t prior to
the Sec ond W orld W ar and man y of the Europ ean ph ysicis ts in volved in these disc overies c ame from c ountries
that were b eing o verrun.) Natural uranium c ontains U-238 and only U-235, and do es not pro duce
a chain re action . To pro duce a c ontrolle d, sus taina ble chain re action , the p ercenta ge of U-235 mus t be
incre ased to a bout . In addition , the uranium sample mus t be mas sive enough so a typic al neutron is more
likely to induc e fis sion than it is to esc ape. The minimum mas s nee ded for the chain re action to o ccur is c alled
the crit ical mas s. When the critic al mas s reaches a p oint a t which the chain re action b ecomes self -sus taining ,
this is a c ondition kno wn as crit icality. The original design re quire d tw o piec es o f U-235 b elow the critic al
mas s. When one piec e in the f orm o f a bullet is fire d into the sec ond piec e, the critic al mas s is e xceeded and a
chain re action is pro duced.
An imp ortant obs tacle to the U -235 b omb is the pro duction o f a critic al mas s of fissiona ble ma terial . Theref ore,
scientis ts dev elop ed a plutonium-239 b omb b ecause Pu-239 is more fis siona ble than U -235 and thus re quires
a smaller critic al mas s. The b omb w as made in the f orm o f a sphere with piec es o f plutonium , each b elow the10.5 • Fission 467

critic al mas s, at the e dge of the sphere . A series o f chemic al explosions fire d the plutonium piec es to ward the
center o f the sphere simultaneously . When all these piec es o f plutonium c ame tog ether , the c ombina tion
exceeded the critic al mas s and pro duced a chain re action . Both the U -235 and Pu-239 b ombs w ere use d in
World W ar II. Whether to dev elop and use a tomic w eapons remain tw o of the mos t imp ortant ques tions fac ed
by human civiliza tion .
EXAMPLE 10.9
Calcula ting Ener gy Released b y Fis sion
Calcula te the energ y rele ased in the f ollowing rare sp ontaneous fis sion re action:
The a tomic mas ses are and
Strategy
As alw ays, the energ y rele ased is e qual to the mas s des troyed times , so w e mus t find the diff erenc e in mas s
between the p arent and the fis sion pro ducts .
Solution
The pro ducts ha ve a total mas s of
The mas s los t is the mas s of or
Theref ore, the energ y rele ased is
Significanc e
Several imp ortant things arise in this e xample . The energ y rele ase is larg e but les s than it w ould b e if the
nucleus split into tw o equal p arts, sinc e energ y is c arrie d away by neutrons . Ho wever, this fis sion re action
produces neutrons and do es not split the nucleus into tw o equal p arts. Fission o f a giv en nuclide , such as ,
does not alw ays pro duce the same pro ducts . Fission is a s tatistical pro cess in which an entire rang e of
products are pro duced with v arious prob abilities . Mos t fission pro duces neutrons , although the numb er varies .
This is an e xtremely imp ortant asp ect o f fission , because neutrons c an induc e more fis sion , ena bling self -
sustaining chain re actions .
Fission Nuclear Reac tors
The firs tnucle ar re actor was built b y Enric oFermi on a squash c ourt on the c ampus o f the Univ ersity o f
Chic ago on Dec emb er 2, 1942. The re actor itself c ontaine d U-238 enriche d with U-235. N eutrons
produced by the chain re action mo ve too fas t to initia te fis sion re actions . One w ay to slo w them do wn is to
enclose the entire re actor in a w ater b ath under high pres sure . The neutrons c ollide with the w ater molecules
and are slo wed enough to b e use d in the fis sion pro cess. The slo wed neutrons split more U -235 nuclei and a
chain re action o ccurs . The ra te at which the chain re action pro ceeds is c ontrolle d by a series o f “control ” rods
made o f cadmium inser ted into the re actor . Cadmium is c apable o f absorbing a larg e numb er o f neutrons
without b ecoming uns table.
A nucle ar re actor design , called a pres suriz ed water re actor , can also b e use d to g enera te electricity ( Figure
10.21 ). A pres suriz ed water re actor (on the left in the figure) is designe d to c ontrol the fis sion o f larg e amounts468 10 • Nuclear Phy sics
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

of . The energ y rele ased in this pro cess is a bsorb ed by water flo wing through pip es in the s ystem (the
“primar y loop”) and s team is pro duced. Cadmium c ontrol ro ds adjus t the neutron flux (the ra te of flo w of
neutrons p assing through the s ystem) and theref ore c ontrol the re action . In c ase the re actor o verhe ats and the
water b oils a way, the chain re action termina tes, because w ater is use d to thermaliz e the neutrons . (This sa fety
feature c an b e overwhelme d in e xtreme circums tanc es.) The hot , high-pres sure w ater then p asses through a
pipe to a sec ond tank o f water a t normal pres sure in the s team g enera tor. The s team pro duced at one end o f
the s team g enera tor fills a chamb er tha t contains a turbine . This s team is a t a v ery high pres sure . Me anwhile , a
steam c ondenser c onnecte d to the other side o f the turbine chamb er maintains s team a t low pres sure . The
pres sure diff erenc es force steam through the chamb er, which turns the turbine . The turbine , in turn , powers
an electric g enera tor.
Figur e10.21 A nuclear r eact or uses the ener gy produc ed in the fis sion o f U-235 t o produc e electricity . Ener gy from a nuclear fis sion
reaction pr oduc es hot, high-pr essure steam that turns a turbine . As the turbine turns , electricity is pr oduc ed.
The major dra wback to a fis sion re actor is nucle ar w aste. U-235 fis sion pro duces nuclei with long half -lives
such as that mus t be store d. These pro ducts c annot b e dump ed into o ceans or left in an y plac e where
they will c ontamina te the en vironment , such as through the soil , air, or w ater. Man y scientis ts believ e tha t the
best plac e to s tore nucle ar w aste is the b ottom o f old salt mines or inside o f stable mountains .
Man y people are f earful tha t a nucle ar re actor ma y explo de lik e an a tomic b omb . Ho wever, a nucle ar re actor
does not c ontain enough U -235 to do this . Also, a nucle ar re actor is designe d so tha t failure o f an y mechanism
of the re actor c auses the c admium c ontrol ro ds to fall fully into the re actor , stopping the fis sion pro cess. As
evidenc ed by the F ukushima and Chernob yl disas ters , such s ystems c an fail . Systems and pro cedures to a void
such disas ters is an imp ortant priority f or adv ocates o f nucle ar energ y.
If all electric al power w ere pro duced by nucle ar fis sion o f U-235, Ear th’s kno wn reser ves o f uranium w ould b e
deplete d in les s than a c entur y. Ho wever, Ear th’s supply o f fissiona ble ma terial c an b e expande d considera bly
using a bree der re actor . A bree der re actor op erates f or the firs t time using the fis sion o f U-235 as jus t
describ ed for the pres suriz ed water re actor . But in addition to pro ducing energ y, some o f the fas t neutrons
origina ting from the fis sion o f U-235 are a bsorb ed by U-238, resulting in the pro duction o f Pu-239 via the set
of reactions
The Pu-239 is itself highly fis siona ble and c an theref ore b e use d as a nucle ar fuel in plac e of U-235. Sinc e
of na turally o ccurring uranium is the U -238 isotop e, the use o f bree der re actors should incre ase our
supply o f nucle ar fuel b y roughly a factor o f 100. Bree der re actors are no w in op eration in Gre at Britain ,10.5 • Fission 469

Franc e, and R ussia. Bree der re actors also ha ve dra wbacks . First, bree der re actors pro duce plutonium , which
can, if le aked into the en vironment , pro duce serious public he alth problems . Sec ond , plutonium c an b e use d
to build b ombs , thus incre asing signific antly the risk o f nucle ar prolif eration .
EXAMPLE 10.10
Calcula ting Ener gy of Fis sionable F uel
Calcula te the amount o f energ y pro duced by the fis sion o f 1.00 k g of given tha t the a verage fis sion
reaction o f produces 200 Me V.
Strategy
The total energ y pro duced is the numb er o f atoms times the giv en energ y per fission . We should
theref ore find the numb er o f atoms in 1.00 k g.
Solution
The numb er o f atoms in 1.00 k g is A vogadro ’s numb er times the numb er o f moles . One mole o f has
a mas s of 235.04 g; thus , there are The numb er o f atoms is
theref ore
Thus , the total energ y rele ased is
Significanc e
This is another impres sively larg e amount o f energ y, equiv alent to a bout 14,000 b arrels o f crude oil or 600,000
gallons o f gasoline . Ho wever, it is only one -fourth the energ y pro duced by the fusion o f a kilogram mixture o f
deuterium and tritium . Even though e ach fis sion re action yields a bout 10 times the energ y of a fusion re action ,
the energ y per kilogram o f fission fuel is les s, because there are far f ewer moles p er kilogram o f the he avy
nuclides . Fission fuel is also much sc arcer than fusion fuel , and les s than of uranium (the ) is re adily
usable.
CHE CK Y OUR UNDER STANDING 10.5
Which has a larg er energ y yield p er fis sion re action , a larg e or small sample o f pure
10.6 Nuclear F usion
Learning Objectiv es
By the end o f this section, y ou wil l be able t o:
•Describe the pr ocess o f nuclear fusion in terms o f its pr oduc t and r eactants
•Calculate the ener gies o f par ticles pr oduced b y a fusion r eaction
•Explain the fission concep t in the conte xt of fusion bombs , the pr oduc tion o f ener gy b y the Sun, and
nucleos ynthesis
The pro cess of combining lighter nuclei to mak e he avier nuclei is c allednucle ar fusion . As with fis sion
reactions , fusion re actions are e xothermic —the y rele ase energ y. Supp ose tha t we fuse a c arbon and helium
nuclei to pro duce oxygen:
The energ y chang es in this re action c an b e unders tood using a graph o f binding energ y per nucleon ( Figure
10.7 ). Comp aring the binding energ y per nucleon f or o xygen, carbon, and helium , the o xygen nucleus is much470 10 • Nuclear Phy sics
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

more tightly b ound than the c arbon and helium nuclei , indic ating tha t the re action pro duces a drop in the
energ y of the s ystem . This energ y is rele ased in the f orm o f gamma radia tion . Fusion re actions are said to b e
exothermic when the amount o f energ y rele ased (kno wn as the Q value ) in e ach re action is gre ater than z ero
An imp ortant e xample o f nucle ar fusion in na ture is the pro duction o f energ y in the Sun . In 1938, Hans Bethe
prop osed tha t the Sun pro duces energ y when h ydrog en nuclei ( ) fuse into s table helium nuclei in the
Sun ’s core ( Figure 10.22 ). This pro cess, called the proton-proton chain , is summariz ed by three re actions:
Thus , a s table helium nucleus is f orme d from the fusion o f the nuclei o f the h ydrog en a tom . These three
reactions c an b e summariz ed by
The net Qvalue is a bout 26 Me V. The rele ase o f this energ y pro duces an outw ard thermal g as pres sure tha t
prev ents the Sun from gra vitational c ollapse . Astroph ysicis ts find tha t hydrog en fusion supplies the energ y
stars re quire to maintain energ y balanc e over mos t of a s tar's lif e sp an.
Figur e10.22 The Sun pr oduc es ener gy by fusing h ydrogen int o helium at the Sun ’s core. The r ed arr ows sho w outw ard pressure due t o
thermal g as, which t ends t o mak e the Sun e xpand. The blue arr ows sho w in ward pressure due t o gravity, which t ends t o mak e the Sun
contr act. These tw o influenc es balanc e each other .
Nucleos ynthesis
Scientis t no w believ e tha t man y he avy elements f ound on Ear th and throughout the univ erse w ere originally
synthesiz ed by fusion within the hot c ores o f the s tars . This pro cess is kno wn as nucleosynthesis . For
example , in lighter s tars , hydrog en c ombines to f orm helium through the proton-proton chain . Onc e the
hydrog en fuel is e xhausted, the s tar enters the ne xt stage of its lif e and fuses helium . An e xample o f a nucle ar
reaction chain tha t can o ccur is:10.6 • Nuclear F usion 471

Carbon and o xygen nuclei pro duced in such pro cesses ev entually re ach the s tar’s sur face by convection . Near
the end o f its lif etime , the s tar loses its outer la yers into sp ace, thus enriching the inters tellar me dium with the
nuclei o f he avier elements ( Figure 10.23 ).
Figur e10.23 A planetar y nebula is pr oduc ed at the end o f the lif e of a s tar. The gr eenish c olor o f this planetar y nebula c omes fr om o xygen
ions . (credit: Hubble Heritag e Team (S TScI/A URA/NASA/ESA) )
Stars similar in mas s to the Sun do not b ecome hot enough to fuse nuclei as he avy (or he avier) than o xygen
nuclei . Ho wever, in mas sive stars whose c ores b ecome much hot ter even more c omple x
nuclei are pro duced. Some representa tive re actions are
Nucleos ynthesis c ontinues until the c ore is primarily iron-nick el metal . Now, iron has the p eculiar prop erty
that an y fusion or fis sion re action in volving the iron nucleus is endothermic , me aning tha t energ y is a bsorb ed
rather than pro duced. Henc e, nucle ar energ y cannot b e genera ted in an iron-rich c ore. Lacking an outw ard
pres sure from fusion re actions , the s tar b egins to c ontract due to gra vity. This pro cess he ats the c ore to a
temp erature on the order o f Exp anding sho ck w aves g enera ted within the s tar due to the c ollapse
cause the s tar to quickly e xplo de. The luminosity o f the s tar c an incre ase temp orarily to ne arly tha t of an entire
galaxy . During this ev ent, the flo od of energ etic neutrons re acts with iron and the other nuclei to pro duce
elements he avier than iron . These elements , along with much o f the s tar, are ejecte d into sp ace by the
explosion . Sup erno vae and the f orma tion o f planetar y nebulas tog ether pla y a major role in the disp ersal o f
chemic al elements into sp ace.
Eventually , much o f the ma terial los t by stars is pulle d tog ether through the gra vitational f orce, and it
condenses into a new g enera tion o f stars and ac comp anying planets . Recent ima ges from the Hubble S pace
Telesc ope pro vide a glimpse o f this ma gnific ent pro cess taking plac e in the c onstella tion Serp ens ( Figure472 10 • Nuclear Phy sics
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

10.24 ). The new g enera tion o f stars b egins the nucleos ynthesis pro cess anew , with a higher p ercenta ge of
heavier elements . Thus , stars are “factories” f or the chemic al elements , and man y of the a toms in our b odies
were onc e a p art of stars .
Figur e10.24 This imag e tak en b y NASA ’s Spitz er Spac e Telesc ope and the T wo Micr on Al l Sky Sur vey (2MAS S), sho ws the Serpens Cloud
Core, a star-forming r egion in the c onstellation Serpens (the “ Serpent ”). L ocat ed about 750 light -years a way, this clus ter of stars is f ormed
from c ooling dus t and g ases . Infr ared light has been used t o reveal the y oung est stars in or ange and y ellow. (credit: NASA/JPL -Cal tech/
2MAS S)
EXAMPLE 10.11
Ener gy of the Sun
The p ower output o f the Sun is appro xima tely Mos t of this energ y is pro duced in the Sun ’s core
by the proton-proton chain . This energ y is transmit ted outw ard b y the pro cesses o f convection and radia tion .
(a) Ho w man y of these fusion re actions p er sec ond mus t occur to supply the p ower radia ted by the Sun? ( b)
Wha t is the ra te at which the mas s of the Sun decre ases? (c) In a bout fiv e billion y ears, the c entral c ore o f the
Sun will b e deplete d of hydrog en. By wha t percenta ge will the mas s of the Sun ha ve decre ased from its present
value when the c ore is deplete d of hydrog en?
Strategy
The total energ y output p er sec ond is giv en in the problem s tatement . If w e kno w the energ y rele ased in e ach
fusion re action , we can determine the ra te of the fusion re actions . If the mas s los s per fusion re action is
kno wn, the mas s los s rate is kno wn. Multiplying this ra te by fiv e billion y ears giv es the total mas s los t by the
Sun . This v alue is divide d by the original mas s of the Sun to determine the p ercenta ge of the Sun ’s mas s tha t
has b een los t when the h ydrog en fuel is deplete d.
Solution
a.The decre ase in mas s for the fusion re action is
The energ y rele ased per fusion re action is
Thus , to supply there mus t be
b.The Sun ’s mas s decre ases b y per fusion re action , so the ra te at which its mas s
decre ases is10.6 • Nuclear F usion 473

c.In the Sun ’s mas s will theref ore decre ase b y
The current mas s of the Sun is a bout so the p ercenta ge decre ase in its mas s when its
hydrog en fuel is deplete d will b e
Significanc e
After fiv e billion y ears, the Sun is v ery ne arly the same mas s as it is no w. Hy drog en burning do es v ery little to
chang e the mas s of the Sun . This c alcula tion as sumes tha t only the proton-proton dec ay chang e is resp onsible
for the p ower output o f the Sun .
CHE CK Y OUR UNDER STANDING 10.6
Where do es the energ y from the Sun origina te?
The Hy drogen Bomb
In 1942, R obert Opp enheimer sugg ested tha t the e xtremely high temp erature o f an a tomic b omb c ould b e use d
to trigg er a fusion re action b etween deuterium and tritium , thus pro ducing a fusion (or h ydrog en) b omb . The
reaction b etween deuterium and tritium , both isotop es o f hydrog en, is giv en b y
Deuterium is rela tively a bundant in o cean w ater but tritium is sc arce. Ho wever, tritium c an b e genera ted in a
nucle ar re actor through a re action in volving lithium . The neutrons from the re actor c ause the re action
to pro duce the desire d tritium . The firs t hydrog en b omb w as detona ted in 1952 on the remote island o f
Eniw etok in the Marshall Islands . A h ydrog en b omb has nev er b een use d in w ar. Mo dern h ydrog en b ombs are
appro xima tely 1000 times more p owerful than the fis sion b ombs dropp ed on Hiroshima and N agasaki in
World W ar II.
The F usion Reac tor
The fusion chain b eliev ed to b e the mos t practic al for use in a nucle ar fusion re actor is the f ollowing tw o-step
process:
This chain , like the proton-proton chain , pro duces energ y without an y radio activ e by-pro duct . Ho wever, there
is a v ery difficult problem tha t mus t be overcome b efore fusion c an b e use d to pro duce signific ant amounts o f
energ y: Extremely high temp eratures are nee ded to driv e the fusion pro cess. To meet this challeng e,
test fusion re actors are b eing dev elop ed to withs tand temp eratures 20 times gre ater than the Sun ’s core
temp erature . An e xample is the J oint Europ ean T orus (JET ) sho wn in Figure 10.25 . A gre at deal of work s till
has to b e done on fusion re actor technolog y, but man y scientis ts pre dict tha t fusion energ y will p ower the
world ’s cities b y the end o f the tw entieth c entur y.474 10 • Nuclear Phy sics
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Figur e10.25 The Joint Eur opean T orus (JET ) tokamak fusion det ector uses magnetic fields t o fuse deut erium and tritium nuclei (cr edit:
EUR Ofusion).
10.7 Medical Applications and Biological Ef fects of Nuclear
Radiation
Learning Objectiv es
By the end o f this section, y ou wil l be able t o:
•Describe t wo medical uses o f nuclear technology
•Explain the origin o f biological e ffects due to nuclear r adiation
•List common sour ces o f radiation and their e ffects
•Estimate e xposur e for nuclear r adiation using common dosage units
Nucle ar ph ysics is an integral p art of our ev eryday liv es (Figure 10.26 ). Radio activ e comp ounds are use d to
identif y cancer, study ancient ar tifacts , and p ower our cities . Nucle ar fusion also p owers the Sun , the primar y
sourc e of energ y on Ear th. The f ocus o f this chapter is nucle ar radia tion . In this section , we ask such ques tions
as: Ho w is nucle ar radia tion use d to b enefit so ciety? Wha t are its he alth risks? Ho w much nucle ar radia tion is
the a verage person e xposed to in a lif etime?10.7 • Medical Applications and Biological Ef fects of Nuclear Radiation 475

Figur e10.26 Dr. Tori R andal l, a cur ator at the San Dieg o Museum o f Man, uses nuclear r adiation t o study a 500- year-old P eruvian child
mumm y. The origin o f this r adiation is the tr ansformation o f one nucleus t o another . (credit: Samantha A . Lewis, U.S. Na vy)
Medical Applications
Medical use o f nucle ar radia tion is quite c ommon in to day’s hospitals and clinics . One o f the mos t imp ortant
uses o f nucle ar radia tion is the lo cation and s tudy o f dise ased tis sue. This applic ation re quires a sp ecial dr ug
called aradiopharmac eutical. A radiopharmac eutic al contains an uns table radio activ e isotop e. When the
drug enters the b ody, it tends to c oncentra te in inflame d regions o f the b ody. (Recall tha t the interaction o f the
drug with the b ody do es not dep end on whether a giv en nucleus is replac ed by one o f its isotop es, sinc e this
interaction is determine d by chemic al interactions .) Radia tion detectors use d outside the b ody use nucle ar
radia tion from the radioisotop es to lo cate the dise ased tis sue. Radiopharmac eutic als are c alledradio active
tagsbecause the y allo w do ctors to track the mo vement o f drugs in the b ody. Radio activ e tags are f or man y
purp oses , including the identific ation o f cancer cells in the b ones , brain tumors , and A lzheimer ’s dise ase
(Figure 10.27 ). Radio activ e tags are also use d to monitor the function o f body org ans, such as blo od flo w, heart
muscle activity , and io dine uptak e in the th yroid gland .
Figur e10.27 These br ain imag es ar e produc ed using a r adiopharmac eutical . The c olors indicat e relativ e metabolic or biochemical activity
(red indicat es high activity and blue indicat es lo w activity). The fig ure on the left sho ws the normal br ain o f an individual and the fig ure on476 10 • Nuclear Phy sics
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

the right sho ws the br ain o f someone diagnosed with Alzheimer ’s disease . The br ain imag e of the normal br ain indicat es much gr eater
metabolic activity (a lar ger fr action o f red and or ange areas). (cr edit: modification o f works by National Ins titut es o f Heal th)
Table 10.2 lists some me dical dia gnos tic uses o f radiopharmac eutic als, including isotop es and typic al activity
(A) lev els. One c ommon dia gnos tic tes t uses io dine to ima ge the th yroid , sinc e iodine is c oncentra ted in tha t
organ. Another c ommon nucle ar dia gnos tic is the thallium sc an f or the c ardio vascular s ystem , which rev eals
blockages in the c oronar y ar teries and e xamines he art activity . The salt TlCl c an b e use d because it acts lik e
NaCl and f ollows the blo od. Note tha tTable 10.2 lists man y dia gnos tic uses f or , where “m ” stands f or a
metas table s tate of the technetium nucleus . This isotop e is use d in man y comp ounds to ima ge the sk eleton ,
heart, lungs , and kidne ys. Ab out of all radiopharmac eutic als emplo y because it pro duces a single ,
easily identifie d, 0.142-Me Vray and has a shor t 6.0-h half -life, which re duces radia tion e xposure .
Procedur e,
IsotopeActivity (mCi), wher e Procedur e,
IsotopeActivity (mCi), wher e
Brain sc an Thyroid sc an
7.5 0.05
(PET ) 50 0.07
Lung sc an Liver sc an
7.5(colloid)0.1
2(colloid)2
Cardio vascular blo od pool Bone sc an
0.2 0.1
2 10
Cardio vascular ar terial flo w Kidne y sc an
3 0.1
7.5 1.5
Table 10.2 Diagnos tic U ses o f Radiopharmac eutic als
The firs t radia tion detectors pro duced tw o-dimensional ima ges, like a photo tak en from a c amera. Ho wever, a
circular arra y of detectors tha t can b e rota ted can b e use d to pro duce three -dimensional ima ges. This
technique is similar to tha t use d in X -ray compute d tomograph y (CT ) scans. One applic ation o f this technique
is calledsingle -photon-emis sion CT (SPECT )(Figure 10.28 ). The sp atial resolution o f this technique is a bout
1 cm .10.7 • Medical Applications and Biological Ef fects of Nuclear Radiation 477

Figur e10.28 The SPECT machine uses r adiopharmac eutical c ompounds t o produc e an imag e of the human body . The machine tak es
advantag e of the ph ysics o f nuclear beat deca ys and electr on-positr on c ollisions . (credit: “ Woldo ”/Wikimedia Commons)
Impro ved ima ge resolution is achiev ed by a technique kno wn as positron emis sion tomograph y (PET ). This
technique use radioisotop es tha t dec ay by radia tion . When a p ositron enc ounters an electron , these
particle annihila te to pro duce tw o gamma-ra y photons . This re action is represente d by
These -ray photons ha ve identic al 0.511-Me V energies and mo ve directly a way from one another ( Figure
10.29 ). This e asily identifie d dec ay signa ture c an b e use d to identif y the lo cation o f the radio activ e isotop e.
Examples o f -emit ting isotop es use d in PET include . The nuclei ha ve the adv anta ge
of being a ble to function as ta gs for na tural b ody c omp ounds . Its resolution o f 0.5 cm is b etter than tha t of
SPECT .
Figur e10.29 A PET s ystem tak es adv antag e of the tw o identical -ray phot ons pr oduc ed b y positr on-electr on annihilation. These rays
are emit ted in opposit e dir ections , so that the line along which each pair is emit ted is det ermined.478 10 • Nuclear Phy sics
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

PET sc ans are esp ecially useful to e xamine the brain ’s ana tom y and function . For e xample , PET sc ans c an b e
used to monitor the brain ’s use o f oxygen and w ater, identif y regions o f decre ased meta bolism ( link ed to
Alzheimer ’s dise ase), and lo cate diff erent p arts of the brain resp onsible f or sight , speech , and fine motor
activity
INTER ACTIVE
Is it a tumor? V iew an anima tion (https:/ /openstax.org/l/21simma gresimg )of simplifie d ma gnetic resonanc e
ima ging (MRI) to see if y ou c an tell . Your he ad is full o f tin y radio transmit ters (the nucle ar spins o f the
hydrog en nuclei o f your w ater molecules). In an MRI unit , these lit tle radios c an b e made to bro adcast their
positions , giving a detaile d picture o f the inside o f your he ad.
Biological Ef fects
Nucle ar radia tion c an ha ve both p ositiv e and neg ative eff ects on biologic al systems . Ho wever, it c an also b e
used to tre at and ev en cure c ancer. Ho w do w e unders tand these eff ects? T o ans wer this ques tion , consider
molecules within c ells, particularly DN A molecules .
Cells ha ve long , double -helic al DN A molecules c ontaining chemic al codes tha t govern the function and
processes o f the c ell. Nucle ar radia tion c an alter the s tructural f eatures o f the DN A chain , leading to chang es in
the g enetic c ode. In human c ells, we can ha ve as man y as a million individual ins tanc es o f dama ge to DN A per
cell p er da y. DN A contains c odes tha t check whether the DN A is dama ged and c an rep air itself. This rep air
ability o f DN A is vital f or maintaining the integrity o f the g enetic c ode and f or the normal functioning o f the
entire org anism . It should b e constantly activ e and nee ds to resp ond rapidly . The ra te of DN A rep air dep ends
on v arious factors such as the typ e and a ge of the c ell. If nucle ar radia tion dama ges the a bility o f the c ell to
repair DN A, the c ell c an
1. Retre at to an irrev ersible s tate of dormancy ( kno wn as senesc ence);
2. Commit suicide ( kno wn as programme d cell de ath); or
3. Progres s into unregula ted cell division , possibly le ading to tumors and c ancers.
Nucle ar radia tion c an harm the human b ody is man y other w ays as w ell. For e xample , high doses o f nucle ar
radia tion c an c ause burns and ev en hair los s.
Biologic al eff ects o f nucle ar radia tion are e xpres sed by man y diff erent ph ysical quantities and in man y
different units . A c ommon unit to e xpres s the biologic al eff ects o f nucle ar radia tion is the rad orradiat ion
dose unit . One rad is e qual to 1/100 o f a joule o f nucle ar energ y dep osite d per kilogram o f tissue, writ ten:
For e xample , if a 50.0-k g person is e xposed to nucle ar radia tion o ver her entire b ody and she a bsorbs 1.00 J ,
then her whole -body radia tion dose is
Nucle ar radia tion dama ges c ells b y ionizing a toms in the c ells as the y pass through the c ells ( Figure 10.30 ).
The eff ects o f ionizing radia tion dep end on the dose in rads , but also on the typ e of radia tion (alpha, b eta,
gamma, or X -ray) and the typ e of tissue. For e xample , if the rang e of the radia tion is small , as it is f or rays,
then the ioniza tion and the dama ge cre ated is more c oncentra ted and harder f or the org anism to rep air. To
account f or such a ffects , we define the relat ive biologic al eff ectivenes s(RBE). Sample RBE v alues f or sev eral
types o f ionizing nucle ar radia tion are giv en in Table 10.3 .10.7 • Medical Applications and Biological Ef fects of Nuclear Radiation 479

Figur e10.30 The imag e sho ws ionization cr eated in c ells byand radiation. Because o f its shor ter range, the ionization and damag e
created b yrays is mor e concentr ated and har der f or the or ganism t o repair . Thus , the RBE f or rays is gr eater than the RBE f or rays,
even though the y create the same amount o f ionization at the same ener gy.
Type and Ener gy of Radiation RBE[1]
X-rays 1
rays 1
rays gre ater than 32 k eV 1
rays les s than 32 k eV 1.7
Neutrons , thermal to slo w (<20 k eV) 2–5
Neutrons , fas t (1–10 Me V) 10 ( body), 32 (e yes)
Protons (1–10 Me V) 10 ( body), 32 (e yes)
rays from radio activ e dec ay 10–20
Heavy ions from ac celera tors 10–20
Table 10.3 Relative Biologic al Eff ectiv enes s[1]Values appro xima te. Difficult to determine .
A dose unit more closely rela ted to eff ects in biologic al tis sue is c alled the roentgen e quiv alent man (rem) and
is define d to b e the dose (in rads) multiplie d by the rela tive biologic al eff ectiv enes s (RBE). Thus , if a p erson had
a whole -body dose o f 2.00 rad o fradia tion , the dose in rem w ould b e rem f or the whole
body. If the p erson had a whole -body dose o f 2.00 rad o fradia tion , then the dose in rem w ould b e
rem f or the whole b ody. The rays would ha ve 20 times the eff ect on the p erson than the
rays for the same dep osite d energ y. The SI e quiv alent o f the rem , and the more s tandard term , is the sievert
(Sv)is
The RBEs giv en in Table 10.3 are appro xima te but reflect an unders tanding o f nucle ar radia tion and its
interaction with living tis sue. For e xample , neutrons are kno wn to c ause more dama ge than rays, although
both are neutral and ha ve larg e rang es, due to sec ondar y radia tion . An y dose les s than 100 mSv (10 rem) is
called alow dose , 0.1 Sv to 1 Sv (10 to 100 rem) is c alled amoderate dose , and an ything gre ater than 1 Sv (100
rem) is c alled ahigh dose . It is difficult to determine if a p erson has b een e xposed to les s than 10 mSv .
Biologic al eff ects o f diff erent lev els o f nucle ar radia tion on the human b ody are giv en in Table 10.4 . The firs t480 10 • Nuclear Phy sics
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

clue tha t a p erson has b een e xposed to radia tion is a chang e in blo od count , which is not surprising sinc e
blood cells are the mos t rapidly repro ducing c ells in the b ody. At higher doses , nausea and hair los s are
obser ved, which ma y be due to inter ferenc e with c ell repro duction . Cells in the lining o f the dig estive system
also rapidly repro duce, and their des truction c auses na usea. When the gro wth o f hair c ells slo ws, the hair
follicles b ecome thin and bre ak o ff. High doses c ause signific ant c ell de ath in all s ystems , but the lo west doses
that cause fa talities do so b y weakening the immune s ystem through the los s of white blo od cells.
Dose in S v[1]Effect
0–0.10 No obser vable eff ect.
0.1–1 Slight to mo dera te decre ase in white blo od cell c ounts .
0.5 Temp orar y sterility; 0.35 f or w omen , 0.50 f or men .
1–2 Signific ant re duction in blo od cell c ounts , brief na usea and v omiting . Rarely fa tal.
2–5 Nausea, vomiting , hair los s, sev ere blo od dama ge, hemorrha ge, fatalities .
4.5 Lethal to of the p opula tion within 32 da ys after e xposure if not tre ated.
5–20 Worst eff ects due to malfunction o f small intes tine and blo od systems . Limite d sur vival.
>20 Fatal within hours due to c ollapse o f central ner vous s ystem .
Table 10.4 Imme diate Eff ects o f Radia tion (A dults , Whole -Body, Single Exp osure)[1]Multiply b y 100 to obtain
dose in rem .
Sour ces o f Radiation
Human are also e xposed to man y sourc es o f nucle ar radia tion . A summar y of average radia tion doses f or
different sourc es b y countr y is giv en in Table 10.5 . Ear th emits radia tion due to the isotop es o f uranium ,
thorium , and p otas sium . Radia tion lev els from these sourc es dep end on lo cation and c an v ary by a factor o f 10.
Fertiliz ers c ontain isotop es o f potas sium and uranium , which w e dig est in the f ood we eat. Fertiliz ers ha ve
more than 3000 Bq /kg radio activity , comp ared to jus t 66 Bq /kg for C arbon-14.
Sour ce Dose (mS v/y)[1]
Australia German y US World
Natural radia tion – e xternal
Cosmic ra ys 0.30 0.28 0.30 0.39
Soil , building ma terials 0.40 0.40 0.30 0.48
Radon g as 0.90 1.1 2.0 1.2
Natural radia tion – internal
0.24 0.28 0.40 0.2910.7 • Medical Applications and Biological Ef fects of Nuclear Radiation 481

Sour ce Dose (mS v/y)[1]
Artificial radia tion
Medical and dental 0.80 0.90 0.53 0.40
TOTAL 2.6 3.0 3.5 2.8
Table 10.5 Back ground Radia tion Sourc es and A verage Doses[1]Multiply b y 100 to obtain do es in mrem/y .
Medical visits are also a sourc e of nucle ar radia tion . A sample o f common nucle ar radia tion doses is giv en in
Table 10.6 . These doses are g enerally lo w and c an b e lowered fur ther with impro ved techniques and more
sensitiv e detectors . With the p ossible e xception o f routine dental X -rays, me dical use o f nucle ar radia tion is
used only when the risk -benefit is fa vorable. Ches t X-rays giv e the lo west doses —about 0.1 mSv to the tis sue
affecte d, with les s than scattering into tis sues tha t are not directly ima ged. Other X -ray pro cedures rang e
upward to a bout 10 mSv in a CT sc an, and a bout 5 mSv (0.5 rem) p er dental X -ray, again b oth only a ffecting the
tissue ima ged. Me dical ima ges with radiopharmac eutic als giv e doses ranging from 1 to 5 mSv , usually
localized.
Procedur e Effective Dose (mS v)
Ches t 0.02
Dental 0.01
Skull 0.07
Leg 0.02
Mammogram 0.40
Barium enema 7.0
Upp er GI 3.0
CT he ad 2.0
CT a bdomen 10.0
Table 10.6 Typic al Doses R eceived During Dia gnos tic X -Ray Exams
EXAMPLE 10.12
Wha t Mas s of Escaped Chernob yl?
The Chernob yl ac cident in Ukraine (f ormerly in the So viet Union) e xposed the surrounding p opula tion to a
larg e amount o f radia tion through the dec ay of . The initial radio activity lev el w as appro xima tely
Calcula te the total mas s of involved in this ac cident .
Strategy
The total numb er o f nuclei ,N, can b e determine d from the kno wn half -life and activity o f (30.2 y ). The
mas s can b e calcula ted from Nusing the c oncept o f a mole .482 10 • Nuclear Phy sics
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Solution
Solving the e qua tion forNgives
Entering the giv en v alues yields
To convert from curies to b ecquerels and y ears to sec onds , we write
One mole o f a nuclide has a mas s ofAgrams , so tha t one mole o f has a mas s of 137 g . A mole has
nuclei . Thus the mas s of rele ased was
Significanc e
The mas s of involved in the Chernob yl ac cident is a small ma terial c omp ared to the typic al amount o f
fuel use d in a nucle ar re actor . Ho wever, appro xima tely 250 p eople w ere admit ted to lo cal hospitals
imme diately a fter the ac cident , and dia gnose d as suff ering acute radia tion s yndrome . The y rec eived external
radia tion dosa ges b etween 1 and 16 Sv . Referring to biologic al eff ects in Table 10.4 , these dosa ges are
extremely hazardous . The ev entual de ath toll is es tima ted to b e around 4000 p eople , primarily due to
radia tion-induc ed cancer.
CHE CK Y OUR UNDER STANDING 10.7
Radia tion prop agates in all directions from its sourc e, much as electroma gnetic radia tion from a light bulb . Is
activity concept more analog ous to p ower, intensity , or brightnes s?10.7 • Medical Applications and Biological Ef fects of Nuclear Radiation 483

CHAP TER RE VIEW
Key Terms
activitymagnitude o f the dec ay ra te for radio activ e
nuclides
alpha ( α) raysone o f the typ es o f rays emit ted
from the nucleus o f an a tom as alpha p articles
alpha dec ayradio activ e nucle ar dec ay as sociated
with the emis sion o f an alpha p article
antielectrons another term f or p ositrons
antineutrino antip article o f an electron ’s neutrino
in decay
atomic mas stotal mas s of the protons , neutrons ,
and electrons in a single a tom
atomic mas s unit unit use d to e xpres s the mas s of
an individual nucleus , where
atomic nucleus tightly p acked group o f nucleons
at the c enter o f an a tom
atomic numb er numb er o f protons in a nucleus
becquerel (Bq )SI unit f or the dec ay ra te of a
radio activ e ma terial , equal to 1 dec ay/sec ond
beta ( ) raysone o f the typ es o f rays emit ted from
the nucleus o f an a tom as b eta p articles
beta dec ayradio activ e nucle ar dec ay as sociated
with the emis sion o f a b eta p article
binding ener gy (BE) energ y nee ded to bre ak a
nucleus into its c onstituent protons and neutrons
binding ener gy per nucleon (BEN) energ y nee d to
remo ve a nucleon from a nucleus
bree der re actor reactor tha t is designe d to mak e
plutonium
carbon-14 dat ing metho d to determine the a ge of
formerly living tis sue using the ra tio
char t of the nuclides graph c omprising s table and
unstable nuclei
crit ical mas sminimum mas s require d of a giv en
nuclide in order f or self -sus taine d fis sion to o ccur
crit icalitycondition in which a chain re action
easily b ecomes self -sus taining
curie (Ci) unit o f dec ay ra te, or the activity o f 1 g o f
, equal to
daughter nucleus nucleus pro duced by the dec ay
of a p arent nucleus
decayprocess by which an individual a tomic
nucleus o f an uns table a tom loses mas s and
energ y by emit ting ionizing p articles
decay cons tant quantity tha t is in versely
prop ortional to the half -life and tha t is use d in
equa tion f or numb er o f nuclei as a function o f
time
decay series series o f nucle ar dec ays ending in a
stable nucleusfission split ting o f a nucleus
gamma ( ) raysone o f the typ es o f rays emit ted
from the nucleus o f an a tom as g amma p articles
gamma dec ayradio activ e nucle ar dec ay
associated with the emis sion o f gamma radia tion
half -lifetime f or half o f the original nuclei to dec ay
(or half o f the original nuclei remain)
high dose dose o f radia tion gre ater than 1 Sv (100
rem)
isotop es nuclei ha ving the same numb er o f
protons but diff erent numb ers o f neutrons
lifetime average time tha t a nucleus e xists before
decaying
liquid drop mo del model o f nucleus (only to
unders tand some o f its f eatures) in which
nucleons in a nucleus act lik e atoms in a drop
low dose dose o f radia tion les s than 100 mSv (10
rem)
mas s def ect differenc e between the mas s of a
nucleus and the total mas s of its c onstituent
nucleons
mas s numb er numb er o f nucleons in a nucleus
moderate dose dose o f radia tion from 0.1 Sv to 1
Sv (10 to 100 rem)
neutrino subatomic elementar y particle which has
no net electric charg e
neutron numb er numb er o f neutrons in a nucleus
nucle ar fusion process of combining lighter nuclei
to mak e he avier nuclei
nucle ar fusion re actor nucle ar re actor tha t uses
the fusion chain to pro duce energ y
nucleons protons and neutrons f ound inside the
nucleus o f an a tom
nucleosynthesis process of fusion b y which all
elements on Ear th are b eliev ed to ha ve been
created
nuclide nucleus
parent nucleus original nucleus b efore dec ay
positron electron with p ositiv e charg e
positron emis sion tomograph y (PET )tomograph y
technique tha t uses emit ters and detects the
two annihila tion rays, aiding in sourc e
localiza tion
proton-proton chain combine d re actions tha t fuse
hydrog en nuclei to pro duce He nuclei
radiat ion dose unit (rad) ionizing energ y
dep osite d per kilogram o f tissue
radio active dat ing applic ation o f radio activ e dec ay
in which the a ge of a ma terial is determine d by
the amount o f radio activity o f a p articular typ e484 10 • Chap ter Re view
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

that occurs
radio active dec ay law describ es the e xponential
decre ase o f parent nuclei in a radio activ e sample
radio active tags special dr ugs
(radiopharmac eutic als) tha t allo w do ctors to track
movement o f other dr ugs in the b ody
radio activityspontaneous emis sion o f radia tion
from nuclei
radiopharmac eutical comp ound use d for me dical
ima ging
radius of a nucleus radius o f a nucleus is define d
as
relat ive biologic al eff ectivenes s (RBE) numb erthat expres ses the rela tive amount o f dama ge tha t
a fix ed amount o f ionizing radia tion o f a giv en
type can inflict on biologic al tis sues
roentgen e quiv alent man (rem) dose unit more
closely rela ted to eff ects in biologic al tis sue
sievert (Sv )SI equiv alent o f the rem
single -photon-emis sion c ompute d tomograph y
(SPECT )tomograph y performe d with
-emit ting radiopharmac eutic als
strong nucle ar forceforce tha t binds nucleons
together in the nucleus
transuranic element element tha t lies b eyond
uranium in the p erio dic ta ble
Key Equations
Atomic mas s numb er
Standard f orma t for e xpres sing an isotop e
Nucle ar radius , where r0is the radius o f a single proton
Mas s def ect
Binding energ y
Binding energ y per nucleon
Radio activ e dec ay ra te
Radio activ e dec ay law
Dec ay constant
Lifetime o f a subs tanc e
Activity o f a radio activ e subs tanc e
Activity o f a radio activ e subs tanc e (line ar form)
Alpha dec ay
Beta dec ay
Positron emis sion
Gamma dec ay10 • Chap ter Re view 485

Summar y
10.1 Proper ties o f Nuclei
•The a tomic nucleus is c omp osed of protons and
neutrons .
•The numb er o f protons in the nucleus is giv en
by the a tomic numb er,Z. The numb er o f
neutrons in the nucleus is the neutron numb er,
N. The numb er o f nucleons is mas s numb er,A.
•Atomic nuclei with the same a tomic numb er,Z,
but diff erent neutron numb ers,N, are isotop es
of the same element .
•The a tomic mas s of an element is the w eighte d
average of the mas ses o f its isotop es.
10.2 Nuclear Binding Ener gy
•The mas s def ect o f a nucleus is the diff erenc e
between the total mas s of a nucleus and the sum
of the mas ses o f all its c onstituent nucleons .
•The binding energ y (BE) o f a nucleus is e qual to
the amount o f energ y rele ased in f orming the
nucleus , or the mas s def ect multiplie d by the
speed of light square d.
•A graph o f binding energ y per nucleon (BEN)
versus a tomic numb erAimplies tha t nuclei
divide d or c ombine d rele ase an enormous
amount o f energ y.
•The binding energ y of a nucleon in a nucleus is
analog ous to the ioniza tion energ y of an
electron in an a tom .
10.3 Radioac tive Decay
•In the dec ay of a radio activ e subs tanc e, if the
decay constant ( ) is larg e, the half -life is small ,
and vic e versa.
•The radio activ e dec ay law, uses
the prop erties o f radio activ e subs tanc es to
estima te the a ge of a subs tanc e.
•Radio activ e carbon has the same chemis try as
stable c arbon, so it mix es into the ec osphere
and ev entually b ecomes p art of every living
organism . By comp aring the a bundanc e of
in an ar tifact with the normal a bundanc e in
living tis sue, it is p ossible to determine the
artifact ’s age.
10.4 Nuclear Reac tions
•The three typ es o f nucle ar radia tion are alpha (
) rays, beta ( ) rays, and g amma ( ) rays.
•We represent decay symb olically b y
. There are tw o typ es o f
decay: either an electron ( ) or a p ositron ( )
is emit ted by a nucleus .decay is represente dsymb olically b y .
•When a he avy nucleus dec ays to a lighter one ,
the lighter da ughter nucleus c an b ecome the
parent nucleus f or the ne xt dec ay, and so on ,
producing a dec ay series .
10.5 Fission
•Nucle ar fis sion is a pro cess in which the sum o f
the mas ses o f the pro duct nuclei are les s than
the mas ses o f the re actants .
•Energ y chang es in a nucle ar fis sion re action c an
be unders tood in terms o f the binding energ y
per nucleon cur ve.
•The pro duction o f new or diff erent isotop es b y
nucle ar trans forma tion is c alled bree ding , and
reactors designe d for this purp ose are c alled
bree der re actors .
10.6 Nuclear F usion
•Nucle ar fusion is a re action in which tw o nuclei
are c ombine d to f orm a larg er nucleus; energ y is
rele ased when light nuclei are fuse d to f orm
medium-mas s nuclei .
•The amount o f energ y rele ased by a fusion
reaction is kno wn as the Qvalue .
•Nucle ar fusion e xplains the re action b etween
deuterium and tritium tha t pro duces a fusion
(or h ydrog en) b omb; fusion also e xplains the
production o f energ y in the Sun , the pro cess of
nucleos ynthesis , and the cre ation o f the he avy
elements .
10.7 Medical Applications and Biological
Effects of Nuclear Radiation
•Nucle ar technolog y is use d in me dicine to lo cate
and s tudy dise ased tis sue using sp ecial dr ugs
called radiopharmac eutic als. Radio activ e tags
are use d to identif y cancer cells in the b ones ,
brain tumors , and A lzheimer ’s dise ase, and to
monitor the function o f body org ans, such as
blood flo w, heart muscle activity , and io dine
uptak e in the th yroid gland .
•The biologic al eff ects o f ionizing radia tion are
due to tw o eff ects it has on c ells: inter ferenc e
with c ell repro duction and des truction o f cell
function .
•Common sourc es o f radia tion include tha t
emit ted by Ear th due to the isotop es o f uranium ,
thorium , and p otas sium; na tural radia tion from
cosmic ra ys, soils , and building ma terials , and
artificial sourc es from me dical and dental486 10 • Chap ter Re view
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

diagnos tic tes ts.
•Biologic al eff ects o f nucle ar radia tion are
expres sed by man y diff erent ph ysical quantitiesand in man y diff erent units , including the rad or
radia tion dose unit .
Concep tual Ques tions
10.1 Proper ties o f Nuclei
1.Define and mak e cle ar dis tinctions b etween the
terms neutron , nucleon , nucleus , and nuclide .
2.Wha t are isotop es? Wh y do isotop es o f the same
atom share the same chemic al prop erties?
10.2 Nuclear Binding Ener gy
3.Explain wh y a b ound s ystem should ha ve les s
mas s than its c omp onents . Wh y is this not
obser ved traditionally , say, for a building made o f
bricks?
4.Why is the numb er o f neutrons gre ater than the
numb er o f protons in s table nuclei tha t ha ve an A
greater than a bout 40? Wh y is this eff ect more
pronounc ed for the he avies t nuclei?
5.To obtain the mos t precise v alue o f the binding
energ y per nucleon , it is imp ortant to tak e into
account f orces b etween nucleons a t the sur face
of the nucleus . Will sur face eff ects incre ase or
decre ase es tima tes o f BEN?
10.3 Radioac tive Decay
6.How is the initial activity ra te of a radio activ e
subs tanc e rela ted to its half -life?
7.For the c arbon da ting describ ed in this chapter ,
wha t imp ortant as sumption is made a bout the
time v aria tion in the intensity o f cosmic ra ys?
10.4 Nuclear Reac tions
8.Wha t is the k ey diff erenc e and the k ey similarity
between b eta ( )decay and alpha dec ay?
9.Wha t is the diff erenc e between rays and
characteris tic X -rays and visible light?10.Wha t characteris tics o f radio activity sho w it to
be nucle ar in origin and not a tomic?
11.Consider Figure 10.12 . If the ma gnetic field is
replac ed by an electric field p ointe d in to ward
the p age, in which directions will the -, -,
and rays bend?
12.Why is Ear th’s core molten?
10.5 Fission
13.Should an a tomic b omb re ally b e callednucle ar
bomb?
14.Why do es a chain re action o ccur during a
fission re action?
15.In wha t way is an a tomic nucleus lik e a liquid
drop?
10.6 Nuclear F usion
16.Explain the diff erenc e between nucle ar fis sion
and nucle ar fusion .
17.Why do es the fusion o f light nuclei into he avier
nuclei rele ase energ y?
10.7 Medical Applications and Biological
Effects of Nuclear Radiation
18.Why is a PET sc an more ac cura te than a SPECT
scan?
19.Isotop es tha t emit radia tion are rela tively sa fe
outside the b ody and e xceptionally hazardous
inside . Explain wh y.
20.Ionizing radia tion c an imp air the a bility o f a c ell
to rep air DN A. Wha t are the three w ays the c ell
can resp ond?
Problems
10.1 Proper ties o f Nuclei
21.Find the a tomic numb ers, mas s numb ers, and
neutron numb ers f or (a) (b) (c)
(d) and (e) .
22.Silver has tw o stable isotop es. The nucleus ,
has a tomic mas s 106.905095 g /mol with
an a bundanc e of ; where as has
atomic mas s 108.904754 g /mol with an
abundanc e of . Find the a tomic mas s ofthe element silv er.
23.The mas s (M) and the radius ( r) of a nucleus c an
be expres sed in terms o f the mas s numb er,A.
(a) Sho w tha t the density o f a nucleus is
indep endent o fA. (b) C alcula te the density o f a
gold (A u) nucleus . Comp are y our ans wer to tha t
for iron (F e).
24.A particle has a mas s equal to 10 u . If this mas s
is converted completely into energ y, how much
energ y is rele ased? Expres s your ans wer in10 • Chap ter Re view 487

meg a-electron v olts (Me V). (R ecall tha t
.)
25.Find the length o f a side o f a cub e ha ving a mas s
of 1.0 k g and the density o f nucle ar ma tter.
26.The detail tha t you c an obser ve using a prob e is
limite d by its w avelength . Calcula te the energ y
of a p article tha t has a w avelength o f
, small enough to detect details
about one -tenth the siz e of a nucleon .
10.2 Nuclear Binding Ener gy
27.How much energ y would b e rele ased if six
hydrog en a toms and six neutrons w ere
combine d to f orm
28.Find the mas s def ect and the binding energ y for
the helium-4 nucleus .
29. is among the mos t tightly b ound o f all
nuclides . It mak es up more than of na tural
iron . Note tha t has ev en numb ers o f
protons and neutrons . Calcula te the binding
energ y per nucleon f or and c omp are it
with the appro xima te value obtaine d from the
graph in Figure 10.7 .
30. is the he avies t stable nuclide , and its BEN
is lo w comp ared with me dium-mas s nuclides .
Calcula te BEN f or this nucleus and c omp are it
with the appro xima te value obtaine d from the
graph in Figure 10.7 .
31.(a) C alcula te BEN f or , the rarer o f the tw o
mos t common uranium isotop es; ( b) C alcula te
BEN f or . (Mos t of uranium is .)
32.The fact tha t BEN p eaks a t roughly
implies tha t the rang eof the s trong nucle ar
force is a bout the diameter o f this nucleus .
(a) C alcula te the diameter o f nucleus .
(b) C omp are BEN f or . The firs t is
one o f the mos t tightly b ound nuclides , where as
the sec ond is larg er and les s tightly b ound .
10.3 Radioac tive Decay
33.A sample o f radio activ e ma terial is obtaine d
from a v ery old ro ck. A plot ln Averses tyields a
slop e value o f (see Figure 10.10 (b)).
Wha t is the half -life of this ma terial?
34.Sho w tha t: .
35.The half -life of strontium-91, is 9.70 h .
Find (a) its dec ay constant and ( b) for an initial
1.00- g sample , the activity a fter 15 hours .
36.A sample o f pure c arbon-14 has
an activity o f Wha t is the mas s of the
sample?37.A radio activ e sample initially c ontains
mol o f a radio activ e ma terial
whose half -life is 6.00 h . Ho w man y moles o f the
radio activ e ma terial remain a fter 6.00 h? After
12.0 h? After 36.0 h?
38.An old c ampfire is unc overed during an
archaeologic al dig . Its charc oal is f ound to
contain les s than 1/1000 the normal amount o f
. Estima te the minimum a ge of the charc oal,
noting tha t
39.Calcula te the activity , in curies o f 1.00 g o f
(b) Explain wh y your ans wer is not
exactly 1.00 Ci , giv en tha t the curie w as
originally supp osed to b e exactly the activity o f
a gram o f radium .
40.Natural uranium c onsis ts of
,
and
,
Wha t were the v alues f or
percent a bundanc e of and when
Earth forme d years a go?
41.World W ar II aircra ft had ins truments with
glowing radium-p ainte d dials . The activity o f
one such ins trument w as Bq when
new . (a) Wha t mas s of was present? ( b)
After some y ears, the phosphors on the dials
deteriora ted chemic ally, but the radium did not
escape. Wha t is the activity o f this ins trument
57.0 y ears a fter it w as made?
42.The sourc e use d in a ph ysics la boratory is
labeled as ha ving an activity o f on the
date it w as prep ared. A s tudent me asures the
radio activity o f this sourc e with a Geig er
counter and obser ves 1500 c ounts p er minute .
She notic es tha t the sourc e was prep ared 120
days before her la b. Wha t fraction o f the dec ays
is she obser ving with her app aratus?
43.Armor -piercing shells with deplete d uranium
cores are fire d by aircra ft at tanks . (The high
density o f the uranium mak es them eff ectiv e.)
The uranium is c alled deplete d because it has
had its remo ved for re actor use and is
nearly pure . Deplete d uranium has b een
erroneously c alled nonradio activ e. To
demons trate tha t this is wrong: (a) C alcula te the
activity o f 60.0 g o f pure . (b) C alcula te the
activity o f 60.0 g o f na tural uranium , neglecting
the and all da ughter nuclides .
10.4 Nuclear Reac tions
44. underg oes alpha dec ay. (a) W rite the488 10 • Chap ter Re view
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

reaction e qua tion . (b) F ind the energ y rele ased
in the dec ay.
45.(a) C alcula te the energ y rele ased in the decay
of . (b) Wha t fraction o f the mas s of a single
is des troyed in the dec ay? The mas s of
is 234.043593 u . (c) A lthough the
fractional mas s los s is larg e for a single nucleus ,
it is difficult to obser ve for an entire
macrosc opic sample o f uranium . Wh y is this?
46.The particles emit ted in the dec ay of
(tritium) interact with ma tter to cre ate light in a
glow-in-the -dark e xit sign . At the time o f
manufacture , such a sign c ontains 15.0 Ci o f .
(a) Wha t is the mas s of the tritium? ( b) Wha t is
its activity 5.00 y a fter manufacture?
47.(a) W rite the c omplete decay equa tion f or
a major w aste pro duct o f nucle ar re actors .
(b) F ind the energ y rele ased in the dec ay.
48.Write a nucle ar decay re action tha t pro duces
the nucleus . (Hint: The p arent nuclide is a
major w aste pro duct o f reactors and has
chemis try similar to c alcium , so tha t it is
concentra ted in b ones if ing ested.)
49.Write the c omplete dec ay equa tion in the
complete nota tion f or the b eta ( ) dec ay
of (tritium), a manufacture d isotop e of
hydrog en use d in some digital w atch displa ys,
and manufacture d primarily f or use in
hydrog en b ombs .
50.If a 1.50- cm-thick piec e of lead c an a bsorb
of the ra ys from a radio activ e sourc e, how
man y centimeters o f lead are nee ded to a bsorb
all but of the ra ys?
51.An electron c an interact with a nucleus through
the b eta-dec ay pro cess:
.
(a) W rite the c omplete re action e qua tion f or
electron c apture b y .
(b) C alcula te the energ y rele ased.
52.(a) W rite the c omplete re action e qua tion f or
electron c apture b y
(b) C alcula te the energ y rele ased.
53.A rare dec ay mo de has b een obser ved in which
emits a nucleus . (a) The dec ay
equa tion is . Identif y the
nuclide . (b) F ind the energ y emit ted in the
decay. The mas s of is 222.015353 u .
10.5 Fission
54.A larg e power re actor tha t has b een in op eration
for some months is turne d off, but residual
activity in the c ore s till pro duces 150 MW o fpower. If the a verage energ y per dec ay of the
fission pro ducts is 1.00 Me V, wha t is the c ore
activity?
55.(a) C alcula te the energ y rele ased in this rare
neutron-induc ed fis sion
, giv en
and
.
(b) This result is a bout 6 Me V gre ater than the
result f or sp ontaneous fis sion . Wh y?
(c) C onfirm tha t the total numb er o f nucleons
and total charg e are c onser ved in this re action .
56.(a) C alcula te the energ y rele ased in the neutron-
induc ed fis sion re action
, giv en
and
. (b) C onfirm tha t the
total numb er o f nucleons and total charg e are
conser ved in this re action .
57.The electric al power output o f a larg e nucle ar
reactor facility is 900 MW . It has a
efficiency in c onverting nucle ar p ower to
electric al power.
(a) Wha t is the thermal nucle ar p ower output in
meg awatts?
(b) Ho w man y nuclei fis sion e ach sec ond ,
assuming the a verage fis sion pro duces 200
MeV?
(c) Wha t mas s of is fis sione d in 1 y ear o f
full-p ower op eration?
58.Find the total energ y rele ased if 1.00 k g of
were to underg o fis sion .
10.6 Nuclear F usion
59.Verify tha t the total numb er o f nucleons , and
total charg e are c onser ved for e ach o f the
following fusion re actions in the proton-proton
chain .
(i) ,
(ii) , and (iii)
.
(List the v alue o f each o f the c onser ved
quantities b efore and a fter e ach o f the
reactions .)
60.Calcula te the energ y output in e ach o f the fusion
reactions in the proton-proton chain , and v erify
the v alues determine d in the prec eding
problem .
61.Sho w tha t the total energ y rele ased in the
proton-proton chain is 26.7 Me V, considering
the o verall eff ect in ,10 • Chap ter Re view 489

, and
. Be sure to
include the annihila tion energ y.
62.Two fusion re actions mentione d in the te xt are
and . Both
reactions rele ase energ y, but the sec ond also
creates more fuel . Confirm tha t the energies
produced in the re actions are 20.58 and 2.22
MeV, resp ectiv ely. Comment on which pro duct
nuclide is mos t tightly b ound , or .
63.The p ower output o f the Sun is (a)
If of this energ y is supplie d by the proton-
proton chain , how man y protons are c onsume d
per sec ond? ( b) Ho w man y neutrinos p er sec ond
should there b e per square meter a t the sur face
of Ear th from this pro cess?
64.Another set o f reactions tha t fuses h ydrog en
into helium in the Sun and esp ecially in hot ter
stars is c alled the CNO cy cle:
This pro cess is a “ cycle” because app ears a t
the b eginning and end o f these re actions . Write
down the o verall eff ect o f this cy cle (as done f or
the proton-proton chain in
). As sume tha t
the p ositrons annihila te electrons to f orm more
rays.
65.(a) C alcula te the energ y rele ased by the fusion
of a 1.00-k g mixture o f deuterium and tritium ,
which pro duces helium . There are e qual
numb ers o f deuterium and tritium nuclei in the
mixture .
(b) If this pro cess tak es plac e continuously o ver
a perio d of a y ear, wha t is the a verage power
output?10.7 Medical Applications and Biological
Effects of Nuclear Radiation
66.Wha t is the dose in mSv f or: (a) a 0.1- Gy X -ray?
(b) 2.5 mGy o f neutron e xposure to the e ye? (c)
1.5m Gy o fexposure?
67.Find the radia tion dose in Gy f or: (a) A 10-mSv
fluorosc opic X -ray series . (b) 50 mSv o f skin
exposure b y an emit ter. (c) 160 mSv o f and
rays from the in your b ody.
68.Find the mas s of that has an activity o f
.
69.In the 1980s , the term pic owave was use d to
describ e food irradia tion in order to o vercome
public resis tanc e by pla ying on the w ell-kno wn
safety o f micro wave radia tion . Find the energ y
in Me V of a photon ha ving a w avelength o f a
picometer .
70.Wha t is the dose in Sv in a c ancer tre atment tha t
exposes the p atient to 200 Gy o frays?
71.One half the rays from are a bsorb ed by
a 0.170-mm-thick le ad shielding . Half o f the
rays tha t pass through the firs t layer o f lead are
absorb ed in a sec ond la yer o f equal thicknes s.
Wha t thicknes s of lead will a bsorb all but one in
1000 o f these rays?
72.How man y Gy o f exposure is nee ded to giv e a
cancerous tumor a dose o f 40 Sv if it is e xposed
to activity?
73.A plumb er a t a nucle ar p ower plant rec eives a
whole -body dose o f 30 mSv in 15 minutes while
repairing a cr ucial v alve. Find the radia tion-
induc ed yearly risk o f death from c ancer and
the chanc e of genetic def ect from this
maximum allo wable e xposure .
74.Calcula te the dose in rem/y f or the lungs o f a
weapons plant emplo yee who inhales and
retains an activity o f in an
accident . The mas s of affecte d lung tis sue is
2.00 k g and the plutonium dec ays by emis sion
of a 5.23-Me V particle . Assume a RBE v alue o f
20.
Additional P roblems
75.The wiki-phon y site s tates tha t the a tomic mas s
of chlorine is 40 g /mol . Check this result .Hint:
The tw o, mos t common s table isotop es o f
chlorine are: and . (The a bundanc e of
Cl-35 is , and the a bundanc e of Cl-37 is
.)76.A particle ph ysicis t disc overs a neutral p article
with a mas s of 2.02733 u tha t he as sumes is tw o
neutrons b ound tog ether .
(a) F ind the binding energ y.
(b) Wha t is unre asona ble a bout this result?490 10 • Chap ter Re view
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

77.A nucle ar ph ysicis t finds of in a
piec e of uranium ore ( T1/2 = ). (a)
Use the dec ay law to determine ho w much
would had to ha ve been on Ear th when it
forme d ago for to b e left
today. (b) Wha t is unre asona ble a bout this
result? (c) Ho w is this unre asona ble result
resolv ed?
78.A group o f scientis ts use c arbon da ting to da te a
piec e of wood to b e 3 billion y ears old . Wh y
doesn’t this mak e sense?
79.According to y our la b partner , a 2.00- cm-thick
sodium-io dide cr ystal a bsorbs all but of
rays from a radio activ e sourc e and a 4.00- cm
piec e of the same ma terial a bsorbs all but
Is this result re asona ble?
80.In the scienc e section o f the new spaper, an
article rep orts the eff orts of a group o f scientis ts
to cre ate a new nucle ar re actor b ased on the
fission o f iron (F e). Is this a g ood ide a?81.The c eramic glaz e on a re d-orang e “F iestaware”
plate is and c ontains 50.0 grams o f ,
but v ery little . (a) Wha t is the activity o f the
plate? ( b) C alcula te the total energ y tha t will b e
rele ased by the decay. (c) If energ y is
worth 12.0 c ents p er , wha t is the
monetar y value o f the energ y emit ted? (These
brightly -colore d ceramic pla tes w ent out o f
production some 30 y ears a go, but are s till
available as c ollectibles .)
82.Larg e amounts o f deplete d uranium are
available as a b y-pro duct o f uranium pro cessing
for re actor fuel and w eapons. Uranium is v ery
dense and mak es g ood counter w eights f or
aircra ft. Supp ose y ou ha ve a 4000-k g blo ck o f
. (a) F ind its activity . (b) Ho w man y calories
per da y are g enera ted by thermaliza tion o f the
decay energ y? (c) Do y ou think y ou c ould detect
this as he at? Explain .
83.A piec e of wood from an ancient E gyptian tomb
is tes ted for its c arbon-14 activity . It is f ound to
have an activity p er gram o f carbon o f
. Wha t is the a ge of the
wood?
Challenge P roblems
84.This problem demons trates tha t the binding
energ y of the electron in the ground s tate of a
hydrog en a tom is much smaller than the res t
mas s energies o f the proton and electron .
(a) C alcula te the mas s equiv alent in u o f the
13.6- eV binding energ y of an electron in a
hydrog en a tom , and c omp are this with the
kno wn mas s of the h ydrog en a tom .
(b) Subtract the kno wn mas s of the proton from
the kno wn mas s of the h ydrog en a tom .
(c) T ake the ra tio o f the binding energ y of the
electron (13.6 e V) to the energ y equiv alent o f
the electron ’s mas s (0.511 Me V).
(d) Discus s ho w your ans wers c onfirm the s tated
purp ose o f this problem .85.The Galileo space prob e was la unche d on its
long journe y past Venus and Ear th in 1989, with
an ultima te goal of Jupiter . Its p ower sourc e is
11.0 k g of a by-pro duct o f nucle ar
weapons plutonium pro duction . Electric al
energ y is g enera ted thermo electric ally from the
heat pro duced when the 5.59-Me V particles
emit ted in e ach dec ay crash to a halt inside the
plutonium and its shielding . The half -life of
is 87.7 y ears.
(a) Wha t was the original activity o f the in
becquerels?
(b) Wha t power w as emit ted in kilo watts?
(c) Wha t power w as emit ted 12.0 y a fter la unch?
You ma y neglect an y extra energ y from
daughter nuclides and an y los ses from esc aping
rays.
86.Find the energ y emit ted in the decay of
.10 • Chap ter Re view 491

87.Engineers are fre quently c alled on to insp ect
and , if nec essary, rep air e quipment in nucle ar
power plants . Supp ose tha t the city lights g o out .
After insp ecting the nucle ar re actor , you find a
leaky pip e tha t leads from the s team g enera tor
to turbine chamb er. (a) Ho w do the pres sure
readings f or the turbine chamb er and s team
condenser c omp are? ( b) Wh y is the nucle ar
reactor not genera ting electricity?
88.If tw o nuclei are to fuse in a nucle ar re action ,
they mus t be mo ving fas t enough so tha t the
repulsiv e Coulomb f orce between them do es not
prev ent them f or g etting within of
one another . At this dis tanc e or ne arer , the
attractiv e nucle ar force can o vercome the
Coulomb f orce, and the nuclei are a ble to fuse .
(a) F ind a simple f ormula tha t can b e use d to
estima te the minimum kinetic energ y the nuclei
mus t ha ve if the y are to fuse . To keep the
calcula tion simple , assume the tw o nuclei are
identic al and mo ving to ward one another with
the same sp eedv. (b) U se this minimum kinetic
energ y to es tima te the minimum temp erature a
gas o f the nuclei mus t ha ve before a signific ant
numb er o f them will underg o fusion . Calcula te
this minimum temp erature firs t for h ydrog en
and then f or helium . (Hint: For fusion to o ccur,
the minimum kinetic energ y when the nuclei
are far ap art mus t be equal to the C oulomb
potential energ y when the y are a dis tanc eR
apart.)89.For the re action , , find the
amount o f energ y trans fers to and (on the
right side o f the e qua tion). As sume the
reactants are initially a t res t. (Hint: Use
conser vation o f momentum principle .)
90.Engineers are fre quently c alled on to insp ect
and , if nec essary, rep air e quipment in me dical
hospitals . Supp ose tha t the PET s ystem
malfunctions . After insp ecting the unit , you
susp ect tha t one o f the PET photon detectors is
misaligne d. To tes t your theor y you p osition one
detector a t the lo cation
rela tive to a radio activ e tes t sample a t the
center o f the p atient b ed. (a) If the sec ond
photon detector is prop erly aligne d where
should it b e located? (b) Wha t energ y re ading is
expecte d?492 10 • Chap ter Re view
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

INTR ODUCTIONCHAP TER 11
Particle Ph ysics and Cosmolog y
11.1 Introduc tion to P article Phy sics
11.2 Particle C onser vation L aws
11.3 Quark s
11.4 Particle Acceler ators and De tectors
11.5 The S tandar d Model
11.6 The Big Bang
11.7 Evolution o f the Early Univ erse
At the v ery beginning o f this te xt w e discus sed the wide rang e of scales tha t ph ysics
encomp asses, from the v ery smalles t particles to the larg est scale p ossible —the univ erse itself. In this final
chapter w e examine some o f the frontiers o f rese arch a t these e xtreme sc ales . Particle ph ysics de als with the
mos t basic building blo cks o f ma tter and the f orces tha t hold them tog ether . Cosmolog y is the s tudy o f the
stars , galaxies , and g alactic s tructures tha t popula te our univ erse , as w ell as their p ast his tory and future
Figur e11.1 The L arge Hadr on Col lider (LHC) is locat ed o ver 150 met ers (500 f eet) under ground on the bor der o f
Switz erland and F rance near Gene va, Switz erland. The LHC is the mos t powerful machine e ver de veloped t o test our
unders tanding o f elementar y par ticle int eractions . Sho wn her e is the A TLAS det ector, which helps identif y ne w
particles f ormed in c ollisions . (credit: modification o f work b y Maximilien Bric e, CERN)
Chap ter Outline

evolution .
These tw o are as o f ph ysics are not as disc onnecte d as y ou might think . The s tudy o f elementar y particles
requires enormous energies to pro duce isola ted particles , involving some o f the larg est machines humans
have ev er built . But such high energies w ere present in the e arlies t stages o f the univ erse and the univ erse w e
see around us to day was shap ed in p art by the na ture and interactions o f the elementar y particles cre ated
then . Bear in mind tha t particle ph ysics and c osmolog y are b oth are as o f intense current rese arch , subject to
much sp ecula tion on the p art of ph ysicis ts (as w ell scienc e-fiction writers). In this chapter w e try to emphasiz e
wha t is kno wn on the b asis o f deductions from obser vational evidenc e, and identif y ide as tha t are c onjecture d
but s till unpro ven.
11.1 Introduc tion to P article Phy sics
Learning Objectiv es
By the end o f this section, y ou wil l be able t o:
•Describe the f our fundamental f orces and what par ticles par ticipate in them
•Identif y and describe f ermions and bosons
•Identif y and describe the quark and lep ton f amilies
•Distinguish be tween par ticles and antipar ticles , and describe their inter actions
Elementar y particle ph ysics is the s tudy o f fundamental p articles and their interactions in na ture . Those who
study elementar y particle ph ysics —the p article ph ysicis ts—differ from other ph ysicis ts in the sc ale o f the
systems tha t the y study . A p article ph ysicis t is not c ontent to s tudy the microsc opic w orld o f cells, molecules ,
atoms , or ev en a tomic nuclei . The y are interes ted in ph ysical pro cesses tha t occur a t scales ev en smaller than
atomic nuclei . At the same time , the y eng age the mos t pro found m ysteries in na ture: Ho w did the univ erse
begin? Wha t explains the p attern o f mas ses in the univ erse? Wh y is there more ma tter than antima tter in the
univ erse? Wh y are energ y and momentum c onser ved? Ho w will the univ erse ev olve?
Four F undamental F orces
An imp ortant s tep to ans wering these ques tions is to unders tand p articles and their interactions . Particle
interactions are e xpres sed in terms o f four fundamental f orces. In order o f decre asing s trength , these f orces
are the strong nucle ar force, the electroma gnetic f orce, the weak nucle ar force, and the gra vitational f orce.
1. Strong nucle ar force.The s trong nucle ar force is a v ery strong a ttractiv e force tha t acts only o ver very shor t
distanc es (a bout ). The s trong nucle ar force is resp onsible f or binding protons and neutrons tog ether
in atomic nuclei . Not all p articles p articip ate in the s trong nucle ar force; for ins tanc e, electrons and neutrinos
are not a ffecte d by it. As the name sugg ests, this f orce is much s trong er than the other f orces.
2. Electroma gnet ic force.The electroma gnetic f orce can act o ver very larg e dis tanc es (it has an infinite rang e)
but is only 1/100 the s trength o f the s trong nucle ar force. Particles tha t interact through this f orce are said to
have “charg e.” In the clas sical theor y of static electricity (C oulomb ’s law), the electric f orce varies as the
product o f the charg es o f the interacting p articles , and as the in verse square o f the dis tanc es b etween them . In
contras t to the s trong f orce, the electroma gnetic f orce can b e attractiv e or repulsiv e (opp osite charg es a ttract
and lik e charg es rep el). The ma gnetic f orce dep ends in a more c omplic ated way on the charg es and their
motions . The unific ation o f the electric and ma gnetic f orce into a single electroma gnetic f orce (an achiev ement
of James Clerk Maxw ell) s tands as one o f the gre atest intellectual achiev ements o f the nineteenth c entur y. This
force is c entral to scientific mo dels o f atomic s tructure and molecular b onding .
3. Weak nucle ar force.The w eak nucle ar force acts o ver very shor t dis tanc es and , as its name
sugg est, is v ery weak. It is roughly the s trength o f the s trong nucle ar force. This f orce is manif ested mos t
nota bly in dec ays of elementar y particles and neutrino interactions . For e xample , the neutron c an dec ay to a
proton , electron , and electron neutrino through the w eak force. The w eak force is vitally imp ortant b ecause it
is es sential f or unders tanding s tellar nucleos ynthesis —the pro cess tha t cre ates new a tomic nuclei in the c ores
of stars .
4. Gra vitat ional f orce.Like the electroma gnetic f orce, the gra vitational f orce can act o ver infinitely larg e
distanc es; ho wever, it is only as s trong as the s trong nucle ar force. In N ewton ’s clas sical theor y of
gravity, the f orce of gra vity v aries as the pro duct o f the mas ses o f the interacting p articles and as the in verse494 11 • P article Phy sics and C osmology
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

square o f the dis tanc e between them . This f orce is an a ttractiv e force tha t acts b etween all p articles with mas s.
In mo dern theories o f gra vity, this f orce behavior is c onsidere d a sp ecial c ase f or lo w-energ y macrosc opic
interactions . Comp ared with the other f orces o f na ture , gra vity is b y far the w eakest.
The fundamental f orces ma y not b e truly “fundamental ” but ma y actually b e diff erent asp ects o f the same
force. Just as the electric and ma gnetic f orces w ere unifie d into an electroma gnetic f orce, physicis ts in the
1970s unifie d the electroma gnetic f orce with the w eak nucle ar force into an electro weak f orce. An y scientific
theor y tha t attempts to unif y the electro weak force and s trong nucle ar force is c alled agrand unifie d theor y,
and an y theor y tha t attempts to unif y all f our f orces is c alled atheor y of e verything . We will return to the
concept o f unific ation la ter in this chapter .
Classifications o f Elementar y Particles
A larg e numb er o f sub atomic p articles e xist in na ture . These p articles c an b e clas sifie d in tw o ways: the
prop erty of spin and p articip ation in the f our fundamental f orces. Recall tha t the spin o f a p article is analog ous
to the rota tion o f a macrosc opic object a bout its o wn axis . These typ es o f clas sific ation are describ ed
separately b elow.
Classification b y spin
Particles o f ma tter c an b e divide d into fermion sand boson s. Fermions ha ve half -integral spin ℏ ℏ
and b osons ha ve integral spin ℏ ℏ ℏ Familiar e xamples o f fermions are electrons , protons , and
neutrons . A familiar e xample o f a b oson is a photon . Fermions and b osons b ehave very diff erently in groups .
For e xample , when electrons are c onfine d to a small region o f space,Pauli’s exclusion principle states tha t no
two electrons c an o ccup y the same quantum-mechanic al state. Ho wever, when photons are c onfine d to a small
region o f space, there is no such limita tion .
The b ehavior o f fermions and b osons in groups c an b e unders tood in terms o f the prop erty of
indis tinguisha bility . Particles are said to b e “indis tinguisha ble” if the y are identic al to one another . For
example , electrons are indis tinguisha ble b ecause ev ery electron in the univ erse has e xactly the same mas s
and spin as all other electrons —“when y ou’ve seen one electron , you’ve seen them all .” If y ou s witch tw o
indis tinguisha ble p articles in the same small region o f space, the square o f the w ave function tha t describ es
this s ystem and c an b e me asure d is unchang ed. If this w ere not the c ase, we could tell whether or not
the p articles had b een s witche d and the p article w ould not b e truly indis tinguisha ble. Fermions and b osons
differ b y whether the sign o f the w ave function ( )— not directly obser vable—flips:
Fermions are said to b e “antis ymmetric on e xchang e” and b osons are “ symmetric on e xchang e.” Pauli’s
exclusion principle is a c onse quenc e ofexchang e symmetr yof fermions —a c onnection dev elop ed in a more
advanced course in mo dern ph ysics . The electronic s tructure o f atoms is pre dicated on P auli’s exclusion
principle and is theref ore directly rela ted to the indis tinguisha bility o f electrons .
Classification b y force inter actions
Fermions c an b e fur ther divide d into quark sand lepton s. The primar y diff erenc e between these tw o typ es o f
particles is tha t quarks interact via the s trong f orce and leptons do not . Quarks and leptons (as w ell as b osons
to b e discus sed later) are org aniz ed in Figure 11.2 . The upp er tw o ro ws (firs t three c olumns in purple) c ontain
six quarks . These quarks are arrang ed into tw o particle families: up , charm , and top ( u,c,t), and do wn,
strang e, and b ottom ( d,s,b). Memb ers o f the same p article family share the same prop erties but diff er in mas s
(given in ). For e xample , the mas s of the top quark is much gre ater than the charm quark , and the mas s
of the charm quark is much gre ater than the up quark . All quarks interact with one another through the s trong
nucle ar force.11.1 • Intr oduc tion to P article Phy sics 495

Figur e11.2 The families o f subat omic par ticles , cat egorized b y the types o f forces with which the y int eract. (cr edit: modification o f work
by “Mis sMJ”/ Wikimedia Commons)
Ordinar y ma tter c onsis ts of two typ es o f quarks: the up quark (elementar y charg e, ) and the do wn
quark Heavier quarks are uns table and quickly dec ay to lighter ones via the w eak force. Quarks
bind tog ether in groups o f twos and threes c alledhadron svia the s trong f orce. Hadrons tha t consis t of two
quarks are c alledmesons , and those tha t consis t of three quarks are c alledbaryons . Examples o f mesons
include the pion and kaon , and e xamples o f baryons include the familiar proton and neutron . A proton is tw o
up quarks and a do wn quark and a neutron is one up quark and tw o do wn quarks ( ,
). Properties o f sample mesons and b aryons are giv en in Table 11.1 . Quarks p articip ate in all f our
fundamental f orces: s trong , weak, electroma gnetic , and gra vitational .
The lo wer tw o ro ws in the figure (in green) c ontain six leptons arrang ed into tw o particle families: electron ,
muon , and ta u ( ), and electron neutrino , muon neutrino , and ta u neutrino ( ). The muon is o ver
200 times he avier than an electron , but is other wise similar to the electron . The ta u is a bout 3500 times
heavier than the electron , but is other wise similar to the muon and electron . Onc e cre ated, the muon and ta u
quickly dec ay to lighter p articles via the w eak force. Leptons do not p articip ate in the s trong f orce. Quarks and
leptons will b e discus sed later in this chapter . Leptons p articip ate in the w eak, electroma gnetic , and
gravitational f orces, but do not p articip ate in the s trong f orce.
Bosons (sho wn in re d) are the f orce carriers o f the f ermions . In this mo del, leptons and quarks interact with
each other b y sending and rec eiving b osons . For e xample , Coulombic interaction o ccurs when tw o positiv ely
charg ed particles send and rec eive (exchang e) photons . The photons are said to “ carry” the f orce between
charg ed particles . Lik ewise , attraction b etween tw o quarks in an a tomic nucleus o ccurs when tw o quarks send
and rec eivegluon s. Additional e xamples include W and Z b oson s(which c arry weak nucle ar force) and
gravitons ( which c arry gra vitational f orce). The Higgs b oson is a sp ecial p article: When it interacts with other
particles , it endo ws them not with f orce but with mas s. In other w ords , the Higgs b oson helps to e xplains why
particles ha ve mas s. These as sertions are p art of a tenta tive but v ery pro ductiv e scientific mo del (the Standard
Model) discus sed later.
Particles and Antipar ticles
In the la te 1920s , the sp ecial theor y of rela tivity and quantum mechanics w ere c ombine d into a rela tivis tic
quantum theor y of the electron . A surprising result o f this theor y was the pre diction o f two energ y states f or496 11 • P article Phy sics and C osmology
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

each electron: One is as sociated with the electron , and the other is as sociated with another p article with the
same mas s of an electron but with a charg e of . This p article is c alled the antielectron or positron . The
positron w as disc overed experimentally in the 1930s .
Soon it w as disc overed tha t for ev ery particle in na ture , there is a c orresp onding antiparticle . An antip article
has the same mas s and lif etime as its as sociated particle , and the opp osite sign o f electric charg e. These
particles are pro duced in high-energ y re actions . Examples o f high-energ y particles include the antimuon ( ),
anti-up quark ( ), and anti-do wn quark (Note tha t antip articles f or quarks are designa ted with an o ver-
bar.) Man y mesons and b aryons c ontain antip articles . For e xample , the antiproton ( ) is and the p ositiv ely
charg ed pion is . Some neutral p articles , such as the photon and the meson , are their o wn
antip articles . Sample p articles , antip articles , and their prop erties are lis ted in Table 11.1 .
Particle name Symbol Antipar ticle Mass Average lif etime (s)
Leptons
Electron 0.511 Stable
Electron neutrino Stable
Muon 105.7
Muon neutrino Stable
Tau 1784
Tau neutrino Stable
Hadrons
Baryons Proton p 938.3 Stable
Neutron n 939.6 920
Lamb da 1115.6
Sigma 1189.4
Xi 1315
Omeg a 1672
Mesons Pion 139.6
-Zero 135.0
Kaon 493.7
k-Shor t 497.611.1 • Intr oduc tion to P article Phy sics 497

Particle name Symbol Antipar ticle Mass Average lif etime (s)
k-Long 497.6
J/ J/ J/ 3100
Upsilon 9460
Table 11.1 Particles and their P roperties
The same f orces tha t hold ordinar y ma tter tog ether also hold antima tter tog ether . Under the right c onditions , it
is possible to cre ate antia toms such as antih ydrog en, antio xygen, and ev en antiw ater. In antia toms , positrons
orbit a neg atively charg ed nucleus o f antiprotons and antineutrons .Figure 11.3 comp ares a toms and
antia toms .
Figur e11.3 A comparison o f the simples t atoms o f mat ter and antimat ter. (a) In the Bohr model , an antih ydrogen at om c onsis ts of a
positr on that orbits an antipr oton. (b) An antihelium at om c onsis ts of two positr ons that orbit a nucleus o f two antipr otons and tw o
antineutr ons.
Antima tter c annot e xist for long in na ture b ecause p articles and antip articles annihila te each other to pro duce
high-energ y radia tion . A c ommon e xample is electron-p ositron annihila tion . This pro cess pro ceeds b y the
reaction
The electron and p ositron v anish c ompletely and tw o photons are pro duced in their plac e. (It turns out tha t the
production o f a single photon w ould viola te conser vation o f energ y and momentum .) This re action c an also
proceed in the rev erse direction: Tw o photons c an annihila te each other to pro duce an electron and p ositron
pair. Or, a single photon c an pro duce an electron-p ositron p air in the field o f a nucleus , a pro cess called pair
production . Reactions o f this kind are me asure d routinely in mo dern p article detectors . The e xistenc e of
antip articles in na ture is not scienc e fiction .498 11 • P article Phy sics and C osmology
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

INTER ACTIVE
Watch this video (https:/ /openstax.org/l/21ma tter) to le arn more a bout ma tter and antima tter p articles .
11.2 Particle C onser vation L aws
Learning Objectiv es
By the end o f this section, y ou wil l be able t o:
•Distinguish thr ee conser vation law s: bar yon number , lepton number , and s trangeness
•Use rules to de termine the to tal bar yon number , lepton number , and s trangeness o f par ticles be fore and
after a r eaction
•Use bar yon number , lepton number , and s trangeness conser vation to de termine if par ticle r eactions or
decay s occur
Conser vation la ws are critic al to an unders tanding o f particle ph ysics . Strong evidenc e exists tha t energ y,
momentum , and angular momentum are all c onser ved in all p article interactions . The annihila tion o f an
electron and p ositron a t res t, for e xample , cannot pro duce jus t one photon b ecause this viola tes the
conser vation o f line ar momentum . As discus sed in Relativity , the sp ecial theor y of rela tivity mo difies
definitions o f momentum , energ y, and other familiar quantities . In p articular , the rela tivis tic momentum o f a
particle diff ers from its clas sical momentum b y a factor that varies from 1 to ∞dep ending
on the sp eed of the p article .
In previous chapters , we enc ountere d other c onser vation la ws as w ell. For e xample , charg e is c onser ved in all
electros tatic phenomena. Charg e los t in one plac e is g aine d in another b ecause charg e is c arrie d by particles .
No kno wn ph ysical pro cesses viola te charg e conser vation . In the ne xt section , we describ e three les s-familiar
conser vation la ws: baryon numb er, lepton numb er, and s trang enes s. These are b y no me ans the only
conser vation la ws in p article ph ysics .
Baryon Number C onser vation
No conser vation la w considere d thus far prev ents a neutron from dec aying via a re action such as
This pro cess conser ves charg e, energ y, and momentum . Ho wever, it do es not o ccur b ecause it viola tes the la w
of baryon numb er conser vation . This la w re quires tha t the total b aryon numb er o f a re action is the same
before and a fter the re action o ccurs . To determine the total b aryon numb er, every elementar y particle is
assigne d abaryon numb erB. The b aryon numb er has the v alue for b aryons, –1 f or antib aryons, and 0
for all other p articles . Returning to the a bove case (the dec ay of the neutron into an electron-p ositron p air), the
neutron has a v alue where as the electron and the p ositron e ach has a v alue o f 0. Thus , the dec ay do es
not o ccur b ecause the total b aryon numb er chang es from 1 to 0. Ho wever, the proton-antiproton c ollision
process
doessatisfy the la w of conser vation o f baryon numb er b ecause the b aryon numb er is z ero b efore and a fter the
interaction . The b aryon numb er for sev eral c ommon p articles is giv en in Table 11.2 .
Particle
nameSymbolLepton
numberLepton
numberLepton
numberBaryon
number ( B)Strange -ness
number
Electron 1 0 0 0 0
Electron
neutrino1 0 0 0 011.2 • P article C onser vation L aws 499

Particle
nameSymbolLepton
numberLepton
numberLepton
numberBaryon
number ( B)Strange -ness
number
Muon 0 1 0 0 0
Muon
neutrino0 1 0 0 0
Tau 0 0 1 0 0
Tau
neutrino0 0 1 0 0
Pion 0 0 0 0 0
Positiv e
kaon0 0 0 0 1
Negative
kaon0 0 0 0 –1
Proton p 0 0 0 1 0
Neutron n 0 0 0 1 0
Lamb da
zero0 0 0 1 –1
Positiv e
sigma0 0 0 1 –1
Negative
sigma0 0 0 1 –1
Xi zero 0 0 0 1 –2
Negative xi 0 0 0 1 –2
Omeg a 0 0 0 1 –3
Table 11.2 Conser ved Properties o f Particles
EXAMPLE 11.1
Baryon Number Conser vation
Base d on the la w of conser vation o f baryon numb er, which o f the f ollowing re actions c an o ccur?500 11 • P article Phy sics and C osmology
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Strategy
Determine the total b aryon numb er for the re actants and pro ducts , and re quire tha t this v alue do es not chang e
in the re action .Solut ion
For re action (a), the net b aryon numb er o f the tw o re actants is and the net b aryon numb er o f the
four pro ducts is Sinc e the net b aryon numb ers o f the re actants and pro ducts are e qual , this
reaction is allo wed on the b asis o f the b aryon numb er conser vation la w.
For re action ( b), the net b aryon numb er o f the re actants is and the net b aryon numb er o f the
prop osed pro ducts is Sinc e the net b aryon numb ers o f the re actants and prop osed pro ducts
are not e qual , this re action c annot o ccur.
Significanc e
Baryon numb er is c onser ved in the firs t reaction , but not in the sec ond . Bar yon numb er conser vation
constrains wha t reactions c an and c annot o ccur in na ture .
CHE CK Y OUR UNDER STANDING 11.1
Wha t is the b aryon numb er o f a h ydrog en nucleus?
Lepton Number C onser vation
Lepton numb er conser vation s tates tha t the sum o f lepton numb ers b efore and a fter the interaction mus t be
the same . There are three diff erent lepton numb ers: the electron-lepton numb er the muon-lepton
numb er and the ta u-lepton numb er In an y interaction , each o f these quantities mus t be conser ved
separately. For electrons and electron neutrinos , for their antip articles , all other p articles
have Similarly , for muons and muon neutrinos , for their antip articles , and
for all other p articles . Finally , , or 0, dep ending on whether w e ha ve a ta u or ta u neutrino , their
antip articles , or an y other p article , resp ectiv ely. Lepton numb er conser vation guarantees tha t the numb er o f
electrons and p ositrons in the univ erse s tays rela tively c onstant . (Note: The total lepton numb er is , as far as w e
kno w, conser ved in na ture . Ho wever, obser vations ha ve sho wn v aria tions o f family lepton numb er (f or
example , in a phenomenon c alledneutrino oscilla tions .)
To illus trate the lepton numb er conser vation la w, consider the f ollowing kno wn tw o-step dec ay pro cess:
In the firs t dec ay, all o f the lepton numb ers f or are 0. F or the pro ducts o f this dec ay, for and
for Theref ore, muon-lepton numb er is c onser ved. Neither electrons nor ta u are in volved in this
decay, so and for the initial p article and all dec ay pro ducts . Thus , electron-lepton and ta u-
lepton numb ers are also c onser ved. In the sec ond dec ay, has a muon-lepton numb er where as
the net muon-lepton numb er o f the dec ay pro ducts is . Thus , the muon-lepton numb er is
conser ved. Electron-lepton numb er is also c onser ved, as for , where as the net electron-lepton
numb er o f the dec ay pro ducts is . Finally , sinc e no ta us or ta u-neutrinos are in volved in this
decay, the ta u-lepton numb er is also c onser ved.11.2 • P article C onser vation L aws 501

EXAMPLE 11.2
Lepton Number Conser vation
Base d on the la w of conser vation o f lepton numb er, which o f the f ollowing dec ays can o ccur?
Strategy
Determine the total lepton numb er for the re actants and pro ducts , and re quire tha t this v alue do es not chang e
in the re action .
Solution
For dec ay (a), the electron-lepton numb er o f the neutron is 0, and the net electron-lepton numb er o f the dec ay
products is . Sinc e the net electron-lepton numb ers b efore and a fter the dec ay are the same ,
the dec ay is p ossible on the b asis o f the la w of conser vation o f electron-lepton numb er. Also, sinc e there are no
muons or ta us in volved in this dec ay, the muon-lepton and ta uon-lepton numb ers are c onser ved.
For dec ay (b), the muon-lepton numb er o f the is 0, and the net muon-lepton numb er o f the prop osed dec ay
products is . Thus , on the b asis o f the la w of conser vation o f muon-lepton numb er, this dec ay
cannot o ccur.
Significanc e
Lepton numb er is c onser ved in the firs t reaction , but not in the sec ond . Lepton numb er conser vation
constrains wha t reactions c an and c annot o ccur in na ture .
CHE CK Y OUR UNDER STANDING 11.2
Wha t is the lepton numb er o f an electron-p ositron p air?
Strangeness C onser vation
In the la te 1940s and e arly 1950s , cosmic -ray experiments rev ealed the e xistenc e of particles tha t had nev er
been obser ved on Ear th. These p articles w ere pro duced in c ollisions o f pions with protons or neutrons in the
atmosphere . Their pro duction and dec ay were unusual . The y were pro duced in the s trong nucle ar interactions
of pions and nucleons , and w ere theref ore inf erre d to b e hadrons; ho wever, their dec ay was me diated by the
much more slo wly acting w eak nucle ar interaction . Their lif etimes w ere on the order o f to
where as a typic al lif etime f or a p article tha t dec ays via the s trong nucle ar re action is These p articles
were also unusual b ecause the y were alw ays pro duced in p airs in the pion-nucleon c ollisions . For these
reasons , these newly disc overed particles w ere describ ed as strang e. The pro duction and subse quent dec ay of
a pair o f strang e particles is illus trated in Figure 11.4 and f ollows the re action
The lamb da p article then dec ays through the w eak nucle ar interaction ac cording to
and the kaon dec ays via the w eak interaction502 11 • P article Phy sics and C osmology
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Figur e11.4 The int eractions o f hadr ons. (a) Bubble chamber phot ograph; (b) sk etch that r epresents the phot ograph.
To ra tionaliz e the b ehavior o f these s trang e particles , particle ph ysicis ts in vente d a p article prop erty
conser ved in s trong interactions but not in w eak interactions . This prop erty is c alledstrang enes sand , as the
name sugg ests, is as sociated with the presenc e of a s trang e quark . The s trang enes s of a p article is e qual to the
numb er o f strang e quarks o f the p article . Strang enes s conser vation re quires the total s trang enes s of a re action
or dec ay (summing the s trang enes s of all the p articles) is the same b efore and a fter the interaction .
Strang enes s conser vation is not a bsolute: It is c onser ved in s trong interactions and electroma gnetic
interactions but not in w eak interactions . The s trang enes s numb er for sev eral c ommon p articles is giv en in
Table 11.2 .
EXAMPLE 11.3
Strangenes s Conser vation
(a) Base d on the c onser vation o f strang enes s, can the f ollowing re action o ccur?
(b) The f ollowing dec ay is me diated by the w eak nucle ar force:
Does the dec ay conser ve strang enes s? If not , can the dec ay occur?
Strategy
Determine the s trang enes s of the re actants and pro ducts and re quire tha t this v alue do es not chang e in the
reaction .11.2 • P article C onser vation L aws 503

Solution
a.The net s trang enes s of the re actants is and the net s trang enes s of the pro ducts is
Thus , the s trong nucle ar interaction b etween a pion and a proton is not f orbidden b y the
law of conser vation o f strang enes s. Notice tha t baryon numb er is also c onser ved in the re action .
b.The net s trang enes s before and a fter this dec ay is 1 and 0, so the dec ay do es not c onser ve strang enes s.
However, the dec ay ma y still b e possible , because the la w of conser vation o f strang enes s do es not apply to
weak dec ays.
Significanc e
Strang enes s is c onser ved in the firs t reaction , but not in the sec ond . Strang enes s conser vation c onstrains wha t
reactions c an and c annot o ccur in na ture .
CHE CK Y OUR UNDER STANDING 11.3
Wha t is the s trang enes s numb er o f a muon?
11.3 Quark s
Learning Objectiv es
By the end o f this section, y ou wil l be able t o:
•Compar e and contr ast the six kno wn quark s
•Use quark composition o f hadr ons to de termine the to tal char ge o f these par ticles
•Explain the primar y evidence f or the e xistence o f quark s
In the 1960s , particle ph ysicis ts began to re alize tha t hadrons are not elementar y particles but are made o f
particles c alledquarks . (The name ‘ quark ’ was c oine d by the ph ysicis t Murra yGell-Mann , from a phrase in the
James J oyce no velFinneg ans W ake.) Initially , it w as b eliev ed there w ere only three typ es o f quarks , calledup
(u),down(d), and strang e(s). Ho wever, this numb er so on grew to six —interes tingly , the same as the numb er o f
leptons —to include charme d(c),bottom (b), and top (t).
All quarks are spin-half f ermions have a fractional charg e , and ha ve baryon numb er
Each quark has an antiquark with the same mas s but opp osite charg e and b aryon numb er. The
names and prop erties o f the six quarks are lis ted in Table 11.3 .
Quark Char ge (units o fe)Spin ( s)Baryon number Strangeness number
Down ( d) 1/2 1/3 0
Up ( u) 1/2 1/3 0
Strang e (s) 1/2 1/3
Charm ( c) 1/2 1/3 0
Bottom ( b) 1/2 1/3 0
Top (t) 1/2 1/3 0
Table 11.3 Quarks
Quark C ombinations
As mentione d earlier , quarks bind tog ether in groups o f two or three to f orm hadrons . Bar yons are f orme d504 11 • P article Phy sics and C osmology
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

from three quarks . Sample b aryons, including quark c ontent and prop erties, are giv en in Table 11.4 .
Interes tingly , the delta plus ( ) baryon is f orme d from the same three quarks as the proton , but the total spin
of the p article is 3/2 ra ther than 1/2. Similarly , the mas s of with spin 3/2 is 1.3 times the mas s of the
proton , and the delta z ero ( ) baryon with a spin 3/2 is 1.3 times the neutron mas s. Evidently , the energ y
associated with the spin (or angular momentum) o f the p article c ontributes to its mas s energ y. It is also
interes ting tha t no b aryons are b eliev ed to e xist with top quarks , because top quarks dec ay too quickly to bind
to the other quarks in their pro duction .
Name Symbol Quark sChar ge (unit o fe)Spin ( s)Mass ( )
Proton p u u d 1 1/2 0.938
Neutron n u d d 0 1/2 0.940
Delta plus plus ∆++u u u 2 3/2 1.232
Delta plus ∆+u u d 1 3/2 1.232
Delta z ero ∆0u d d 0 3/2 1.232
Delta minus ∆−d d d 3/2 1.232
Lamb da z ero u d s 0 1/2 1.116
Positiv e sigma u u s 1 1/2 1.189
Neutral sigma u d s 0 1/2 1.192
Negative xi s d s 1/2 1.321
Neutral xi s u s 0 1/2 1.315
Omeg a minus s s s 3/2 1.672
Charme d lamb da u d c 1 1/2 2.281
Bottom lamb da u d b 0 1/2 5.619
Table 11.4 Baryon Quarks
Mesons are f orme d by tw o quarks —a quark -antiquark p air. Sample mesons , including quark c ontent and
prop erties, are giv en in Table 11.5 . Consider the f orma tion o f the pion ( ). Base d on its quark c ontent ,
the charg e of the pion is
Both quarks are spin-half ( ), so the resultant spin is either 0 or 1. The spin o f the meson is 0. The
same quark -antiquark c ombina tion giv es the rho ( ) meson with spin 1. This meson has a mas s appro xima tely
5.5 times tha t of the meson .11.3 • Quark s 505

EXAMPLE 11.4
Quark S tructur e
Sho w tha t the quark c omp osition giv en in Table 11.5 for is consis tent with the kno wn charg e, spin , and
strang enes s of this b aryon.
Strategy
is comp osed of two strang e quarks and an up quark ( s u s ). W e can add tog ether the prop erties o f quarks to
predict the resulting prop erties o f the baryon.
Solution
The charg e of the squark is and the charg e of the uquark is 2 e/3. Thus , the c ombina tion ( s u s ) has no net
charg e, in a greement with the kno wn charg e of . Sinc e three spin quarks c an c ombine to pro duce a
particle with spin o f either 1/2 or 3/2, the quark c omp osition is c onsis tent with the kno wn spin ( ) of .
Finally , the net s trang enes s of the ( s u s ) combina tion is which also a grees with
experiment .
Significanc e
The charg e, spin , and s trang enes s of the particle c an b e determine d from the prop erties o f its c onstituent
quarks . The gre at div ersity o f baryons and mesons c an b e trac ed to the prop erties o f jus t six quarks: up , down,
charg e, strang e, top , and b ottom .
CHE CK Y OUR UNDER STANDING 11.4
Wha t is the b aryon numb er o f a pion?
Name Symbol Quark s Char ge (e)Spin Mass
Positiv e pion 1 0 0.140
Positiv e rho 1 1 0.768
Negative pion 0 0.140
Negative rho 1 0.768
Neutral Pionor0 0 0.135
Neutral eta, or0 0 0.547
Positiv e kaon 1 0 0.494
Neutral kaon 0 0 0.498
Negative kaon 0 0.494
J/Psi 0 1 3.10506 11 • P article Phy sics and C osmology
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Name Symbol Quark s Char ge (e)Spin Mass
Charme d eta 0 0 2.98
Neutral D 0 0 1.86
Neutral D 0 1 2.01
Positiv e D 1 0 1.87
Neutral B 0 0 5.26
Upsilon 0 1 9.46
Table 11.5 Meson Quarks
Color
Quarks are f ermions tha t ob ey Pauli’s exclusion principle , so it might b e surprising to le arn tha t three quarks
can bind tog ether within a nucleus . For e xample , how can tw o up quarks e xist in the same small region o f
space within a proton? The solution is to in vent a third new prop erty to dis tinguish them . This prop erty is
calledcolor , and it pla ys the same role in the s trong nucle ar interaction as charg e do es in electroma gnetic
interactions . For this re ason , quark c olor is sometimes c alled “strong charg e.”
Quarks c ome in three c olors: re d, green , and blue . (These are jus t labels—quarks are not actually c olore d.)
Each typ e of quark can p ossess an y other c olors . For e xample , three s trang e quarks e xist: a re d
strang e quark , a green s trang e quark , and a blue s trang e quark . Antiquarks ha ve antic olor . Quarks tha t bind
together to f orm hadrons ( baryons and mesons) mus t be color neutral , colorles s, or “ white .” Thus , a b aryon
mus t contain a re d, blue , and green quark . Lik ewise , a meson c ontains either a re d-antire d, blue -antiblue , or
green-antigreen quark p air. Thus , two quarks c an b e found in the same spin s tate in a hadron , without
viola ting P auli’s exclusion principle , because their c olors are diff erent .
Quark C onfinement
The firs t strong evidenc e for the e xistenc e of quarks c ame from a series o f experiments p erforme d at the
Stanf ord Line ar A ccelera tor C enter (SL AC) and a t CERN around 1970. This e xperiment w as designe d to prob e
the s tructure o f the proton , much lik e Ruther ford s tudie d structure inside the a tom with his -particle
scattering e xperiments . Electrons w ere c ollide d with protons with energ y in e xcess of 20 Ge V. At this energ y,
, so the de Broglie w avelength o f an electron is
The w avelength o f the electron is much smaller than the diameter o f the proton (a bout Thus , like an
automobile tra veling through a ro cky mountain rang e, electrons c an b e use d to prob e the s tructure o f the
nucleus .
The SL AC experiments f ound tha t some electrons w ere deflecte d at very larg e angles , indic ating small
scattering c enters within the proton . The sc attering dis tribution w as c onsis tent with electrons b eing sc attere d
from sites with spin 1/2, the spin o f quarks . The e xperiments a t CERN use d neutrinos ins tead o f electrons . This
experiment also f ound evidenc e for the tin y sc attering c enters . In b oth e xperiments , the results sugg ested tha t
the charg es o f the sc attering p articles w ere either or , in a greement with the quark mo del.11.111.3 • Quark s 507

INTER ACTIVE
Watch this video (https:/ /openstax.org/l/21quarks) to le arn more a bout quarks .
The quark mo del has b een e xtremely suc cessful in org anizing the c omple x world o f sub atomic p articles .
Interes tingly , however, no e xperiment has ev er pro duced an isola ted quark . All quarks ha ve fractional charg e
and should theref ore b e easily dis tinguisha ble from the kno wn elementar y particles , whose charg es are all an
integ er multiple o fe. Wh y are isola ted quarks not obser ved? In current mo dels o f particle interactions , the
answer is e xpres sed in terms o f quark c onfinement . Quark c onfinement ref ers to the c onfinement o f quarks in
groups o f two or three in a small region o f space. The quarks are c ompletely free to mo ve about in this sp ace,
and send and rec eive gluons (the c arriers o f the s trong f orce). Ho wever, if these quarks s tray too far from one
another , the s trong f orce pulls them b ack it . This action is lik ened to a b ola, a w eapon use d for hunting ( Figure
11.5 ). The s tones are tie d to a c entral p oint b y a s tring , so none o f the ro cks c an mo ve too far from the others .
The b ola c orresp onds to a b aryon, the s tones c orresp ond to quarks , and the s tring c orresp onds to the gluons
that hold the s ystem tog ether .
Figur e11.5 A bar yon is analog ous t o a bola , a w eapon used f or hunting . The r ocks in this imag e correspond t o the bar yon quark s. The
quark s are free to mo ve about but mus t remain close t o the other quark s.
11.4 Particle Acceler ators and De tectors
Learning Objectiv es
By the end o f this section, y ou wil l be able t o:
•Compar e and contr ast different t ypes o f par ticle acceler ators
•Describe the purpose, components , and func tion o f a typical colliding beam machine
•Explain the r ole o f each t ype o f subde tector o f a typical multipurpose par ticle de tector
•Use the cur vature of a char ge tr ack to de termine the momentum o f a par ticle
The g oal of experimental p article ph ysics is to ac cura tely me asure elementar y particles . The primar y metho d
used to achiev e this end is to pro duce these p articles in high-energ y collisions and then me asure the pro ducts
of using highly sensitiv e particle detectors . These e xperiments are use d to tes t and revise scientific mo dels o f
particle interactions . The purp ose o f this section is to describ e particle ac celera tors and detectors . Mo dern
machines are b ased on e arlier ones , so it is helpful to present a brief his tory of accelera tors and detectors .
Early P article Acceler ators
Aparticle ac celerator is a machine designe d to ac celera te charg ed particles . This ac celera tion is usually
achiev ed with s trong electric fields , ma gnetic fields , or b oth. A simple e xample o f a p article ac celera tor is the
Van de Graa ff ac celera tor(see Electric P otential ). This typ e of accelera tor c ollects charg es on a hollo w metal508 11 • P article Phy sics and C osmology
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

sphere using a mo ving b elt. When the electros tatic p otential diff erenc e of the sphere is sufficiently larg e, the
field is use d to ac celera te p articles through an ev acua ted tub e. Energies pro duced by a V an de Graa ff
accelera tor are not larg e enough to cre ate new p articles , but the machine w as imp ortant f or e arly e xplora tion
of the a tomic nucleus .
Larg er energies c an b e pro duced by aline ar ac celera tor(called a “linac”). Charg ed particles pro duced at the
beginning o f the linac are ac celera ted by a c ontinuous line o f charg ed hollo w tub es. The v olta ge between a
given p air o f tub es is set to dra w the charg ed particle in , and onc e the p article arriv es, the v olta ge between the
next p air o f tub es is set to push the charg ed particle out . In other w ords , volta ges are applie d in such a w ay tha t
the tub es deliv er a series o f carefully s ynchroniz ed electric kicks ( Figure 11.6 ). Mo dern linacs emplo y radio
frequency (RF) c avities tha t set up oscilla ting electroma gnetic fields , which prop el the p article f orward lik e a
surfer on an o cean w ave. Linacs c an ac celera te electrons to o ver 100 Me V. (Electrons with kinetic energies
greater than 2 Me V are mo ving v ery close to the sp eed of light .) In mo dern p article rese arch , line ar
accelera tors are o ften use d in the firs t stage of accelera tion .
Figur e11.6 In a linear ac celerator, char ged tubes ac celerate par ticles in a series o f electr omagnetic kick s. Each tube is long er than the
preceding tube because the par ticle is mo ving fas ter as it ac celerates.
EXAMPLE 11.5
Acceler ating T ubes
A line ar ac celera tor designe d to pro duce a b eam o f 800-Me V protons has 2000 ac celera ting tub es sep arated by
gaps. Wha t average volta ge mus t be applie d between tub es to achiev e the desire d energ y? (Hint :
Strategy
The energ y giv en to the proton in e ach g ap b etween tub es is where qis the proton ’s charg e and Vis
the p otential diff erenc e (volta ge) acros s the g ap. Sinc e and11.4 • P article Acceler ators and De tectors 509

the proton g ains 1 e V in energ y for e ach v olt acros s the g ap tha t it p asses
through . The ac v olta ge applie d to the tub es is time d so tha t it adds to the energ y in e ach g ap. The eff ectiv e
volta ge is the sum o f the g ap v olta ges and e quals 800 MV to giv e each proton an energ y of 800 Me V.
Solution
There are 2000 g aps and the sum o f the v olta ges acros s them is 800 MV . Theref ore, the a verage volta ge applie d
is 0.4 MV or 400 k V.
Significanc e
A volta ge of this ma gnitude is not difficult to achiev e in a v acuum . Much larg er g ap v olta ges w ould b e re quire d
for higher energ y, such as those a t the 50- GeV SL AC facility . Synchrotrons are aide d by the circular p ath o f the
accelera ted particles , which c an orbit man y times , effectiv ely multiplying the numb er o f accelera tions b y the
numb er o f orbits . This mak es it p ossible to re ach energies gre ater than 1 T eV.
CHE CK Y OUR UNDER STANDING 11.5
How much energ y do es an electron rec eive in ac celera ting through a 1- V potential diff erenc e?
The ne xt-genera tion ac celera tor a fter the linac is the cy clotron ( Figure 11.7 ). A cyclotron uses alterna ting
electric fields and fix ed ma gnets to ac celera te p articles in a circular spiral p ath. A p article a t the c enter o f the
cyclotron is firs t accelera ted by an electric field in a g ap b etween tw o D-shap ed ma gnets (Dees). As the p article
cros ses o ver the D -shap ed ma gnet , the p article is b ent into a circular p ath b y a Lorentz f orce. (The Lorentz
force was discus sed in Magnetic F orces and F ields .) As suming no energ y los ses, the momentum o f the p article
is rela ted to its radius o f cur vature b y
where pis the momentum in Ge V/c,Bis in teslas , and ris the radius o f the trajector y (“orbit ”) in meters . This
expres sion is v alid to clas sical and rela tivis tic v elocities . The circular trajector y returns the p article to the
electric field g ap, the electric field is rev erse d, and the pro cess continues . As the p article is ac celera ted, the
radius o f cur vature g ets larg er and larg er—spirally outw ard—until the electrons le ave the devic e.
Figur e11.7 Cyclotr ons use a magnetic field t o cause par ticles t o mo ve in cir cular orbits . As the par ticles pas s betw een the plat es o f the
“Dees ,” the v oltage acr oss the g ap is r eversed so the par ticles ar e ac celerated twic e in each orbit.
INTER ACTIVE
Watch this video (https:/ /openstax.org/l/21cy clotron) to le arn more a bout cy clotrons .
Asynchrotron is a circular ac celera tor tha t uses alterna ting v olta ge and incre asing ma gnetic field s trength to
accelera te p articles to higher energies . Charg ed particles are ac celera ted by RF c avities , and s teere d and11.2510 11 • P article Phy sics and C osmology
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

focuse d by ma gnets . RF c avities are synchroniz edto deliv er “kicks” to the p articles as the y pass by, henc e the
name . Steering high-energ y particles re quires s trong ma gnetic fields , so sup erconducting ma gnets are o ften
used to re duce he at los ses. As the charg ed particles mo ve in a circle , the y radia te energ y: According to clas sical
theor y, any charg ed particle tha t accelera tes (and circular motion is an ac celera ted motion) also radia tes. In a
synchrotron , such radia tion is c alledsynchrotron radiat ion. This radia tion is useful f or man y other purp oses ,
such as me dical and ma terials rese arch .
EXAMPLE 11.6
The Ener gy of an Electr on in a Cy clotron
An electron is ac celera ted using a cy clotron . If the ma gnetic field is 1.5 T and the radius o f the “Dees” is 1.2 m ,
wha t is the kinetic energ y of the out going p article?
Strategy
If the radius o f orbit o f the electron e xceeds the radius o f the “Dees ,” the electron e xits the devic e. So, the radius
of the “Dees” plac es an upp er limit on the radius and , theref ore, the momentum and energ y of the ac celera ted
particle . The e xit momentum o f the p article is determine d using the radius o f orbit and s trength o f the
magnetic field . The e xit energ y of the p article c an b e determine d the p article momentum ( Relativity ).
Solution
Assuming no energ y los ses, the momentum o f the p article in the cy clotron is
The momentum energ y is much larg er than the res t mas s energ y of the electron ,
so rela tivis tic e xpres sion f or the energ y of the electron mus t be use d (see Relativity ). The
total energ y of the electron is
Significanc e
The total energ y of the electron is much larg er than its res t mas s energ y. In other w ords , the total energ y of the
electron is almos t all in the f orm o f kinetic energ y. Cyclotrons c an b e use d to c onduct nucle ar ph ysics
experiments or in p article therap y to tre at cancer.
CHE CK Y OUR UNDER STANDING 11.6
A charg ed particle o f a c ertain momentum tra vels in an arc through a unif orm ma gnetic field . Wha t happ ens if
the ma gnetic field is double d?
Colliding Beam Machines
New p articles c an b e cre ated by colliding p articles a t high energies . According to Eins tein ’s mas s-energ y
rela tion , the energies o f the c olliding p articles are c onverted into mas s energ y of the cre ated particle . The mos t
efficient w ay to do this is with p article -colliding b eam machines . A c olliding b eam machine cre ates tw o
counter -rota ting b eams in a circular ac celera tor, stores the b eams a t constant energ y, and then a t the desire d
moment , focuses the b eams on one another a t the c enter o f a sensitiv e detector .
The prototypic al colliding b eam machine is the Cornell Electron Stora ge Ring , located in Ithac a, N ew Y ork
(Figure 11.8 ). Electrons ( ) and p ositrons ( ) are cre ated at the b eginning o f the line ar ac celera tor and are
accelera ted up to 150 Me V. The p articles are then injecte d into the inner s ynchrotron ring , where the y are
accelera ted by RF c avities to 4.5 to 6 Ge V. When the b eams are up to sp eed, the y are trans ferre d and “ store d”
in an outer s tora ge ring a t the same energ y. The tw o counter -rota ting b eams tra vel through the same11.4 • P article Acceler ators and De tectors 511

evacua ted pip e, but are k ept ap art until c ollisions are desire d. The electrons and p ositrons circle the machine
in bunches 390,000 times ev ery sec ond .
Figur e11.8 The Cornel l Electr on St orage Ring uses a linear ac celerator and a s ynchr otron to ac celerate electr ons and positr ons t o 4.5–6
GeV. The par ticles ar e held in the out er storage ring at that ener gy until the y are made t o collide in a par ticle det ector. (credit: modification
of work b y Labor atory of Nuclear Studies , Cornel l Electr on St orage Ring )
When an electron and p ositron c ollide , the y annihila te each other to pro duce a photon , which e xists for to o
shor t a time to b e detecte d. The photon pro duces either a lepton p air (e .g., an electron and p osition , muon or
antimuon , or ta u and antita u) or a quark p air. If quarks are pro duced, mesons f orm , such as and These
mesons are cre ated ne arly a t res t sinc e the initial total momentum o f the electron-p ositron s ystem is z ero.
Note, mesons c annot b e cre ated at jus t an y colliding energ y but only a t “resonant ” energies tha t corresp ond to
the unique mas ses o f the mesons ( Table 11.5 ). The mesons cre ated in this w ay are highly uns table and dec ay
quickly into lighter p articles , such as electrons , protons , and photons . The c ollision “fra gments” pro vide
valua ble inf orma tion a bout p article interactions .
As the field o f particle ph ysics adv ances, colliding b eam machines are b ecoming more p owerful. The Larg e
Hadron C ollider (LHC) , currently the larg est accelera tor in the w orld , collides protons a t beam energies
exceeding 6 T eV. The c enter -of-mas s energ y (W) ref ers to the total energ y available to cre ate new p articles in a
colliding machine , or the total energ y of inc oming p articles in the c enter -of-mas s frame . (The c oncept o f a
center -of-mas s frame o f ref erenc e is discus sed in Line ar Momentum and C ollisions .) Theref ore, the LHC is
able to pro duce one or more p articles with a total mas s exceeding 12 T eV. The c enter -of-mas s energ y is giv en
by:
where and are the total energies o f the inc oming p articles (1 and 2), and are the ma gnitudes o f11.3512 11 • P article Phy sics and C osmology
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

their momenta, and and are their res t mas ses.
EXAMPLE 11.7
Creating a Ne w Particle
The mas s of the upsilon meson ( ) is cre ated in a s ymmetric electron-p ositron c ollider . Wha t beam
energ y is re quire d?
Strategy
The P article Da ta Group (https:/ /openstax.org/l/21p article data)has s tated tha t the res t mas s energ y of this
meson is appro xima tely 10.58 Ge V. The a bove expres sion f or the c enter -of-mas s energ y can b e simplifie d
because a s ymmetric c ollider implies Also, the res t mas ses o f the c olliding electrons and p ositrons
are identic al and much smaller than the mas s of the energ y particle cre ated. Thus , the
center -of-mas s energ y (W) can b e expres sed completely in terms o f the b eam energ y,
Solution
Base d on the a bove as sumptions , we ha ve
The b eam energ y is theref ore
The res t mas s energ y of the p article cre ated in the c ollision is e qual to the c enter -of-mas s energ y, so
Significanc e
Given the energ y sc ale o f this problem , the res t mas s energ y of the upsilon meson is due almos t entirely
due to the initial kinetic energies o f the electron and p ositrons . This meson is highly uns table and quickly
decays to lighter and more s table p articles . The e xistenc e of the upsilon particle app ears as a drama tic
incre ase o f such ev ents a t 5.29 Ge V.
CHE CK Y OUR UNDER STANDING 11.7
Why is a s ymmetric c ollider “ symmetric? ”
Higher b eam energies re quire larg er ac celera tors , so mo dern c olliding b eam machines are v ery larg e. The
LHC , for e xample , is 17 miles in circumf erenc e (Figure 5.27 ). (In the 1940s , Enric o Fermi en visione d an
accelera tor tha t encircle d all o f Ear th!) An imp ortant scientific challeng e of the tw enty -firs t centur y is to
reduce the siz e of particle ac celera tors .
Particle De tectors
The purp ose o f aparticle detector is to ac cura tely me asure the outc ome o f collisions cre ated by a p article
accelera tor. The detectors are multipurp ose. In other w ords , the detector is divide d into man y sub detectors ,
each designe d to me asure a diff erent asp ect o f the c ollision ev ent. For e xample , one detector might b e
designe d to me asure photons and another might b e designe d to me asure muons . To illus trate ho w
subdetectors c ontribute to an unders tanding o f an entire c ollision ev ent, we describ e the sub detectors o f the
Comp act Muon Solenoid (CMS ), which w as use d to disc over the Higgs Boson a t the LHC ( Figure 11.9 ).11.4 • P article Acceler ators and De tectors 513

Figur e11.9 Compact Muon Solenoid det ector. The det ector consis ts of several la yers, each r esponsible f or measuring diff erent types o f
particles . (credit: modification o f work b y Da vid Barne y/CERN)
The b eam pip e of the detector is out o f (and into) the p age at the left . Particles pro duced byppcollisions (the
“collision fra gments”) s tream out o f the detector in all directions . These p articles enc ounter multiple la yers o f
subdetectors . A sub detector is a p article detector within a larg er system o f detectors designe d to me asure
certain typ es o f particles . There are sev eral main typ es o f sub detectors . Tracking devic es determine the p ath
and theref ore momentum o f a p article; c alorimeters me asure a p article ’s energ y; and p article -identific ation
detectors determine a p article ’s identity (mas s).
The firs t set o f sub detectors tha t particles enc ounter is the silic on tracking s ystem . This s ystem is designe d to
measure the momentum o f charg ed particles (such as electrons and protons). The detector is b athed in a
unif orm ma gnetic field , so the charg ed particles are b ent in a circular p ath b y a Lorentz f orce (as f or the
cyclotron). If the momentum o f the p article is larg e, the radius o f the trajector y is larg e, and the p ath is almos t
straight . But if the momentum is small , the radius o f the trajector y is small , and the p ath is tightly cur ved. As
the p articles p ass through the detector , the y interact with silic on micros trip detectors a t multiple p oints . These
detectors pro duce small electric al signals as the charg ed particles p ass ne ar the detector elements . The signals
are then amplifie d and rec orde d. A series o f electric al “hits” is use d to determine the trajector y of the p article
in the tracking s ystem . A c omputer -genera ted “b est fit” to this trajector y giv es the track radius and theref ore
the p article momentum . At the LHC , a larg e numb er o f tracks are rec orde d for the same c ollision ev ent. Fits to
the tracks are sho wn b y the blue and green lines in Figure 11.10 .514 11 • P article Phy sics and C osmology
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Figur e11.10 A thr ee-dimensional vie w of a hea vy-ion c ollision e vent in the LHC as seen b y the ALICE det ector. (credit: LHC/CERN)
Beyond the tracking la yers is the electroma gnetic c alorimeter . This detector is made o f cle ar, lead-b ased
crystals. When electrons interact with the cr ystals, the y radia te high-energ y photons . The photons interact
with the cr ystal to pro duce electron-p ositron p airs . Then , these p articles radia te more photons . The pro cess
repeats, pro ducing a p article sho wer (the cr ystal “ glows”). A cr ude mo del o f this pro cess is as f ollows.
An electron with energ y strikes the cr ystal and loses half o f its energ y in the f orm o f a photon . The photon
produces an electron-p ositron p air, and e ach p article pro ceeds a way with half the energ y of the photon .
Meanwhile , the original electron radia tes a gain. So, we are left with f our p articles: tw o electrons , one p ositron ,
and one photon , each with an energ y The numb er o f particles in the sho wer incre ases g eometric ally.
After nradia tion ev ents , there are particles . Henc e, the total energ y per p article a fter nradia tion
events is
where is the incident energ y and E(t) is the amount o f energ y per p article a fter nevents . An inc oming
photon trigg ers a similar chain o f events ( Figure 11.11 ). If the energ y per p article drops b elow a p articular
threshold v alue , other typ es o f radia tive pro cesses b ecome imp ortant and the p article sho wer ceases .
Eventually , the total energ y of the inc oming p article is a bsorb ed and c onverted into an electric al signal .
Figur e11.11 (a) A par ticle sho wer pr oduc ed in a cr ystal calorimet er. (b) A diagr am sho wing a typical sequenc e of reactions in a par ticle
shower.
Beyond the cr ystal c alorimeter is the hadron c alorimeter . As the name sugg ests, this sub detector me asures11.4 • P article Acceler ators and De tectors 515

hadrons such as protons and pions . The hadron c alorimeter c onsis ts of layers o f bras s and s teel sep arated by
plas tic scintilla tors . Its purp ose is to a bsorb the p article energ y and c onvert it into an electronic signal . Beyond
this detector is a larg e ma gnetic c oil use d to pro duce a unif orm field f or tracking .
The las t sub detector is the muon detector , which c onsis ts of sla bs o f iron tha t only muons (and neutrinos) c an
penetra te. Betw een the iron sla bs are multiple typ es o f muon-tracking elements tha t accura tely me asure the
momentum o f the muon . The muon detectors are imp ortant b ecause the Higgs b oson (discus sed so on) c an b e
detecte d through its dec ays to f our muons —henc e the name o f the detector .
Onc e da ta is c ollecte d from e ach o f the p article sub detectors , the entire c ollision ev ent c an b e as sessed. The
energ y of the ith p article is writ ten
where is the a bsolute ma gnitude o f the momentum o f the ith p article , and is its res t mas s.
The total energ y of all p articles is theref ore
If all p articles are detecte d, the total energ y should b e equal to the c enter -of-mas s energ y of the c olliding b eam
machine ( W). In practic e, not all p articles are identifie d, either b ecause these p articles are to o difficult to
detect (neutrinos) or b ecause these p articles “ slip through .” In man y cases , whole chains o f dec ays can b e
“rec onstructe d,” lik e put ting b ack tog ether a w atch tha t has b een smashe d to piec es. Inf orma tion a bout these
decay chains are critic al to the ev alua tion o f mo dels o f particle interactions .
11.5 The S tandar d Model
Learning Objectiv es
By the end o f this section, y ou wil l be able t o:
•Describe the S tandar d Model in terms o f the f our fundamental f orces and e xchange par ticles
•Draw a F eynman diagr am f or a simple par ticle inter action
•Use Heisenber g’s uncer taint y principle to de termine the r ange o f forces described b y the S tandar d Model
•Explain the r ationale behind gr and unification theories
The chief intellectual activity o f an y scientis t is the dev elopment and revision o f scientific mo dels . A p article
physicis t seeks to dev elop mo dels o f particle interactions . This w ork builds directly on w ork done on gra vity
and electroma gnetism in the sev enteenth , eighteenth , and nineteenth c enturies . The ultima te goal of ph ysics
is a unifie d “theor y of everything ” tha t describ es all p article interactions in terms o f a single eleg ant e qua tion
and a picture . The e qua tion itself might b e comple x, but man y scientis ts susp ect the ideabehind the e qua tion
will mak e us e xclaim: “Ho w could w e ha ve mis sed it? It w as so ob vious!”
In this section , we intro duce the Standard Mo del, which is the b est current mo del o f particle interactions . We
describ e the Standard Mo del in detail in terms o f electroma gnetic , weak nucle ar, and s trong f orces. At the end
of this section , we review unific ation theories in p article ph ysics .
Introduc tion to the S tandar d Model
The Standard Mo del of particle interactions c ontains tw o ide as:electro weak theor yand quantum
chromo dynamics (QCD) (the f orce acting b etween c olor charg es). Electro weak theor y unifies the theor y of
quantum electro dynamics (QED) , the mo dern e quiv alent o f clas sical electroma gnetism , and the theor y of
weak nucle ar interactions . The Standard Mo del c ombines the theor y of rela tivity and quantum mechanics .
In the Standard Mo del, particle interactions o ccur through the e xchang e of bosons , the “f orce carriers .” For
example , the electros tatic f orce is c ommunic ated between tw o positiv ely charg ed particles b y sending and
receiving mas sles s photons . This c an o ccur a t a theoretic al infinite rang e. The result o f these interactions is
Coulomb repulsion (or a ttraction). Similarly , quarks bind tog ether through the e xchang e of mas sles s gluons .
Leptons sc atter o ff other leptons (or dec ay into lighter p articles) through the e xchang e of mas sive W and Z516 11 • P article Phy sics and C osmology
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

bosons . A summar y of forces as describ ed by the Standard Mo del is giv en in Table 11.6 . The gra vitational
force, me diated by the e xchang e of mas sles s gra vitations , is adde d in this ta ble f or c ompletenes s but is not p art
of the Standard Mo del.
ForceRelativ e
strengthExchange par ticle
(bosons)Particles ac ted upon Range
Strong 1 Gluon Quarks
Electroma gnetic 1/137 photon Charg ed particles ∞
Weak Z bosonsQuarks , leptons ,
neutrinos
Gravitational graviton All particles ∞
Table 11.6 Four F orces and the Standard Mo del
The Standard Mo del c an b e expres sed in terms o f equa tions and dia grams . The e qua tions are c omple x and are
usually c overed in a more adv anced course in mo dern ph ysics . Ho wever, the es senc e of the Standard Mo del
can b e capture d using Feynman dia gram s. A F eynman dia gram , invente d by Americ an ph ysicis t Richard
Feynman (1918–1988), is a sp ace-time dia gram tha t describ es ho w particles mo ve and interact . Diff erent
symb ols are use d for diff erent p articles . Particle interactions in one dimension are sho wn as a time -position
graph (not a p osition-time graph). As an e xample , consider the sc attering o f an electron and electron-neutrino
(Figure 11.12 ). The electron mo ves to ward p ositiv e values o fx(to the right) and c ollides with an electron
neutrino mo ving to the left . The electron e xchang es a Z b oson (charg e zero). The electron sc atters to the left
and the neutrino sc atters to the right . This e xchang e is not ins tantaneous . The Z b oson tra vels from one
particle to the other o ver a shor t perio d of time . The interaction o f the electron and neutrino is said to o ccur via
the w eak nucle ar force. This f orce cannot b e explaine d by clas sical electroma gnetism b ecause the charg e of
the neutrino is z ero. The w eak nucle ar force is discus sed again la ter in this section .
Figur e11.12 In this F eynman diagr am, the e xchang e of a vir tual carries the w eak nuclear f orce betw een an electr on and a neutrino .
Electromagne tic Force
According to QED , the electroma gnetic f orce is transmit ted between charg ed particles through the e xchang e of
photons . The theor y is b ased on three b asic pro cesses: An electron tra vels from one plac e to the ne xt, emits or
absorbs a photon , and tra vels from one plac e to another a gain. When tw o electrons interact , one electron emits
the photon and the other rec eives it ( Figure 11.13 ). Photons trans fer energ y and momentum from one electron
to the other . The net result in this c ase is a repulsiv e force. The photons e xchang ed are vir tual . Avirtual11.5 • The S tandar d Model 517

particle is a p article tha t exists for to o shor t a time to b e obser vable. Sinc e the photon transit time is
extremely small , Heisenb erg’s unc ertainty principle s tates tha t the unc ertainty in the photon ’s energ y,
may be very larg e.
Figur e11.13 Feynman diagr am o f two electr ons int eracting thr ough the e xchang e of a phot on.
To es tima te the rang e of the electroma gnetic interaction , assume tha t the unc ertainty on the energ y is
comp arable to the energ y of the photon itself, writ ten
The Heisenb erg unc ertainly principle s tates tha t
Combining these e qua tions , we ha ve
The energ y of a photon is giv en b y , so
The dis tanc edthat the photon c an mo ve in this time is theref ore
The energ y of the vir tual photon c an b e arbitrarily small , so its w avelength c an b e arbitrarily larg e—in
principle , even infinitely larg e. The electroma gnetic f orce is theref ore a long-rang e force.
Weak Nuclear F orce
The w eak nucle ar force is resp onsible f or radio activ e dec ay. The rang e of the w eak nucle ar force is v ery shor t
(only a bout m) and lik e the other f orces in the Standard Mo del, the w eak force can b e describ ed in terms
of particle e xchang e. (There is no simple function lik e the C oulomb f orce to describ e these interactions .) The
particle e xchang ed is one o f three b osons: and . The Standard Mo del pre dicts the e xistenc e of
these spin-1 p articles and also pre dicts their sp ecific mas ses. In c ombina tion with previous e xperiments , the
mas s of the charg ed W b osons w as pre dicte d to b e and tha t of the was pre dicte d to b e
. A CERN e xperiment disc overed particles in the 1980s with precisely these mas ses—an impres sive
victor y for the mo del.
The w eak nucle ar force is mos t fre quently as sociated with sc attering and dec ays of uns table p articles to light
particles . For e xample , neutrons dec ay to protons through the w eak nucle ar force. This re action is writ ten
where n is the neutron , p is a proton , is an electron , and is a ne arly mas sles s electron neutrino . This
process, called beta dec ay, is imp ortant in man y ph ysical pro cesses. A F eynman dia gram o f beta dec ay is giv en11.4
11.5
11.6
11.7
11.8518 11 • P article Phy sics and C osmology
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

inFigure 11.14 (a). The neutron emits a and b ecomes a proton , then the produces an electron and an
antineutrino . This pro cess is similar to the sc attering ev ent
In this pro cess, the proton emits a and is c onverted into a neutron ( b). The then c ombines with the
electron , forming a neutrino . Other electro weak interactions are c onsidere d in the e xercises .
Figur e11.14 Feynman diagr am o f par ticles int eracting thr ough the e xchang e of a W boson: (a) beta deca y; (b) c onversion o f a pr oton int o
a neutr on.
The rang e of the w eak nucle ar force can b e es tima ted with an argument similar to the one b efore. Assuming
the unc ertainty on the energ y is c omp arable to the energ y of the e xchang e particle b y we ha ve
The maximum dis tanc edthat the e xchang e particle c an tra vel (as suming it mo ves a t a sp eed close to c) is
theref ore
For one o f the charg ed vector b osons with we obtain
Henc e, the rang e of the f orce me diated by this b oson is
Strong Nuclear F orce
Strong nucle ar interactions describ e interactions b etween quarks . Details o f these interactions are describ ed
by QCD. According to this theor y, quarks bind tog ether b y sending and rec eiving gluons . Just as quarks c arry
electric charg e [either or that determines the s trength o f electroma gnetic interactions
between the quarks , quarks also c arry “color charg e” (either re d, blue , or green) tha t determines the s trength
of strong nucle ar interactions . As discus sed before, quarks bind tog ether in groups in c olor neutral (or “ white ”)
combina tions , such as re d-blue -green and re d-antire d.
Interes tingly , the gluons themselv es c arry color charg e. Eight kno wn gluons e xist: six tha t carry a c olor and
antic olor , and tw o tha t are c olor neutral ( Figure 11.15 (a)). T o illus trate the interaction b etween quarks through
the e xchang e of charg ed gluons , consider the F eynman dia gram in p art (b). As time incre ases , a re d do wn
quark mo ves right and a green s trang e quark mo ves left . (These app ear a t the lo wer e dge of the graph .) The up
quark e xchang es a re d-antigreen gluon with the s trang e quark . (Antic olors are sho wn as sec ondar y colors . For
example , antire d is represente d by cy an b ecause cy an mix es with re d to f orm white light .) According to Q CD,
all interactions in this pro cess—identifie d with the v ertices—mus t be color neutral . Theref ore, the do wn quark
trans forms from re d to green , and the s trang e quark trans forms from green to re d.11.9
11.10
11.1111.5 • The S tandar d Model 519

Figur e11.15 (a) Eight types o f gluons carr y the s trong nuclear f orce. The whit e gluons ar e mixtur es o f color-antic olor pairs . (b) An
interaction betw een tw o quark s thr ough the e xchang e of a gluon.
As sugg ested by this e xample , the interaction b etween quarks in an a tomic nucleus c an b e very complic ated.
Figure 11.16 shows the interaction b etween a proton and neutron . Notice tha t the proton c onverts into a
neutron and the neutron c onverts into a proton during the interaction . The presenc e of quark -antiquark p airs
in the e xchang e sugg est tha t bonding b etween nucleons c an b e mo dele d as an e xchang e of pions .
Figur e11.16 A Feynman diagr am that describes a s trong nuclear int eraction betw een a pr oton and a neutr on.
In practic e, QCD pre dictions are difficult to pro duce. This difficulty arises from the inherent s trength o f the
force and the ina bility to neglect terms in the e qua tions . Thus , QCD c alcula tions are o ften p erforme d with the
aid o f sup ercomputers . The e xistenc e of gluons is supp orted by electron-nucleon sc attering e xperiments . The
estima ted quark momenta implie d by these sc attering ev ents are much smaller than w e would e xpect without
gluons b ecause the gluons c arry away some o f the momentum o f each c ollision .
Unification Theories
Physicis ts ha ve long kno wn tha t the s trength o f an interaction b etween p articles dep ends on the dis tanc e of
the interaction . For e xample , two positiv ely charg ed particles e xperienc e a larg er repulsiv e force at a shor t520 11 • P article Phy sics and C osmology
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

distanc e then a t a long dis tanc e. In sc attering e xperiments , the s trength o f an interaction dep ends on the
energ y of the interacting p article , sinc e larg er energ y implies b oth closer and s trong er interactions .
Particle ph ysicis ts no w susp ect tha t the s trength o f all p article interactions (the f our f orces) merg e at high
energies , and the details o f particle interactions a t these energies c an b e describ ed in terms o f a single f orce
(Figure 11.17 ). A unifie d theor y describ es wha t these interactions are lik e and e xplains wh y this description
breaks do wn a t low-energ y sc ales . A grand unifie d theor y is a theor y tha t attempts to describ e strong and
electro weak interaction in terms o f jus t one f orce. A theor y of everything ( TOE) tak es the unific ation c oncept
one s tep fur ther . A T OE c ombines all f our fundamental f orces (including gra vity) into one theor y.
Figur e11.17 Grand unification o f forces at high ener gies .
11.6 The Big Bang
Learning Objectiv es
By the end o f this section, y ou wil l be able t o:
•Explain the e xpansion o f the univ erse in terms o f a Hubble gr aph and cosmological r edshif t
•Describe the analogy be tween cosmological e xpansion and an e xpanding balloon
•Use Hubble ’s law to mak e predictions about the measur ed speed o f distant galaxies
We ha ve been discus sing elementar y particles , which are some o f the smalles t things w e can s tudy . Now w e are
going to e xamine wha t we kno w about the univ erse , which is the bigg est thing w e can s tudy . The link b etween
these tw o topics is high energ y: The s tudy o f particle interactions re quires v ery high energies , and the highes t
energies w e kno w about e xisted during the e arly ev olution o f the univ erse . Some ph ysicis ts think tha t the
unifie d force theories w e describ ed in the prec eding section ma y actually ha ve governe d the b ehavior o f the
univ erse in its e arlies t moments .
Hubble ’s Law
In 1929, E dwin Hubble publishe d one o f the mos t imp ortant disc overies in mo dern as tronom y. Hubble
disc overed tha t (1) g alaxies app ear to mo ve away from Ear th and (2) the v elocity o f rec ession ( v) is prop ortional
to the dis tanc e (d) of the g alaxy from Ear th. Both vand dcan b e determine d using s tellar light sp ectra. A b est
fit to the sample illus trative da ta is giv en in Figure 11.18 . (Hubble ’s original plot had a c onsidera ble sc atter but
a general trend w as s till evident .)11.6 • The Big Bang 521

Figur e11.18 This gr aph o f red shift v ersus dis tanc e for galaxies sho ws a linear r elationship , with lar ger red shifts at gr eater dis tanc es,
impl ying an e xpanding univ erse . The slope giv es an appr oximat e value f or the e xpansion r ate. (credit: John Cub)
The trend in the da ta sugg ests the simple prop ortional rela tionship:
where is kno wn as Hubble ’s cons tant . (Note: 1 Mp c is one meg aparsec or one million
parsecs , where one p arsec is 3.26 light -years.) This rela tionship , calledHubble ’s law, states tha t dis tant s tars
and g alaxies rec ede a way from us a t a sp eed of 70 km/s f or ev ery one meg aparsec o f dis tanc e from us .
Hubble ’s constant c orresp onds to the slop e of the line in Figure 11.18 . Hubble ’s constant is a bit o f a misnomer ,
because it v aries with time . The v alue giv en here is only its v alue today.
INTER ACTIVE
Watch this video (https:/ /openstax.org/l/21hubble) to le arn more a bout the his tory of Hubble ’s constant .
Hubble ’s law describ es an a verage behavior o f all but the closes t galaxies . For e xample , a g alaxy 100 Mp c away
(as determine d by its siz e and brightnes s) typic ally mo ves a way from us a t a sp eed of
This sp eed ma y vary due to interactions with neighb oring g alaxies . Conversely , if a g alaxy is f ound to b e
moving a way from us a t speed of 100,000 km/s b ased on its re d shift , it is a t a dis tanc e
This las t calcula tion is appro xima te because it as sumes the e xpansion ra te w as the same 5 billion y ears a go as
it is no w.
Big Bang Model
Scientis ts who s tudy the origin , evolution , and ultima te fa te of the univ erse ( cosmolog y) believ e tha t the
univ erse b egan in an e xplosion , called the Big Bang , appro xima tely 13.7 billion y ears a go. This e xplosion w as
not an e xplosion o f particles through sp ace, like firew orks , but a rapid e xpansion o f space itself. The dis tanc es
and v elocities o f the outw ard-g oing s tars and g alaxies p ermit us to es tima te when all ma tter in the univ erse
was onc e tog ether —at the b eginning o f time .
Scientis ts often e xplain the Big Bang e xpansion using an infla ted-balloon mo del ( Figure 11.19 ). Dots mark ed
on the sur face of the b alloon represent g alaxies , and the b alloon skin represents f our-dimensional sp ace-time
(Relativity ). As the b alloon is infla ted, every dot “ sees” the other dots mo ving a way. This mo del yields tw o
insights . First, the e xpansion is obser ved by all obser vers in the univ erse , no ma tter where the y are lo cated.
The “ center o f expansion ” do es not e xist, so Ear th do es not reside a t the “privileg ed” center o f the e xpansion
(see Exercise 11.24 ).11.12522 11 • P article Phy sics and C osmology
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Figur e11.19 An analog y to the e xpanding univ erse: The dots mo ve away from each other as the bal loon e xpands; c ompar e (a) t o (b) aft er
expansion.
Second , as mentione d alre ady, the Big Bang e xpansion is due to the e xpansion o f space, not the incre ased
separation o f galaxies in ordinar y (static) three -dimensional sp ace. This c osmologic al expansion a ffects all
things: dus t, stars , planets , and ev en light . Thus , the w avelength o f light emit ted by dis tant g alaxies is
“stretche d” out . This mak es the light app ear “re dder ” (lower energ y) to the obser ver—a phenomenon c alled
cosmologic alredshift . Cosmologic al re dshift is me asura ble only f or g alaxies far ther a way than 50 million
light -years.
EXAMPLE 11.8
Calcula ting Speeds and Galactic Dis tanc es
A galaxy is obser ved to ha ve a re dshift:
This v alue indic ates a g alaxy mo ving close to the sp eed of light . Using the rela tivis tic re dshift f ormula ( given in
Relativity ), determine (a) Ho w fas t is the g alaxy rec eding with resp ect to Ear th? ( b) Ho w far a way is the g alaxy?
Strategy
We nee d to use the rela tivis tic Doppler f ormula to determine sp eed from re dshift and then use Hubble ’s law to
find the dis tanc e from the sp eed.
Solution
a.According to the rela tivis tic re dshift f ormula:11.6 • The Big Bang 523

where Subs tituting the v alue f orzand solving f or , we get This v alue implies tha t the
speed of the g alaxy is .
b.Using Hubble ’s law, we can find the dis tanc e to the g alaxy if w e kno w its
recession v elocity:
Significanc e
Distant g alaxies app ear to mo ve very rapidly a way from Ear th. The re dshift o f starlight from these g alaxies c an
be use d to determine the precise sp eed of rec ession , over of the sp eed of light in this c ase. This motion is
not due to the motion o f galaxy through sp ace but b y the e xpansion o f space itself.
CHE CK Y OUR UNDER STANDING 11.8
The light o f a g alaxy tha t mo ves a way from us is “re dshifte d.” Wha t occurs to the light o f a g alaxy tha t mo ves
toward us?
INTER ACTIVE
View this video (https:/ /openstax.org/l/21e xpansion) to le arn more a bout the c osmologic al expansion .
Structure and Dynamics o f the Univ erse
At larg e sc ales , the univ erse is b eliev ed to b e both isotropic and homog eneous . The univ erse is b eliev ed to
isotropic b ecause it app ears to b e the same in all directions , and homog eneous b ecause it app ears to b e the
same in all plac es. A univ erse tha t is isotropic and homog eneous is said to b e smo oth. The as sumption o f a
smo oth univ erse is supp orted by the A utoma ted Pla te Me asurement G alaxy Sur vey conducte d in the 1980s
and 1900s ( Figure 11.20 ). Ho wever, even b efore these da ta w ere c ollecte d, the as sumption o f a smo oth
univ erse w as use d by theoris ts to simplif y mo dels o f the e xpansion o f the univ erse . This as sumption o f a
smo oth univ erse is sometimes c alled the cosmologic al principle .
Figur e11.20 The Aut omat ed Plat e Measur ement (APM) Galaxy Sur vey. Over 2 mil lion g alaxies ar e depict ed in a r egion 100 degr ees524 11 • P article Phy sics and C osmology
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

across centered toward the Milky W ay’s south pole . (credit: 2MAS S/T. H. Jarr ett, J. Carpent er, & R. Hur t)
The fa te of this e xpanding and smo oth univ erse is an op en ques tion . According to the g eneral theor y of
rela tivity , an imp ortant w ay to characteriz e the s tate of the univ erse is through the sp ace-time metric:
where cis the sp eed of light ,ais a sc ale factor (a function o f time), and is the length element o f the sp ace. In
spheric al coordina tes ( , this length element c an b e writ ten
where kis a c onstant with units o f inverse are a tha t describ es the cur vature o f space. This c onstant
distinguishes b etween op en, close d, and fla t univ erses:
• (flat univ erse)
• (close d univ erse , such as a sphere)
• (open univ erse , such as a h yperbola)
In terms o f the sc ale factor a, this metric also dis tinguishes b etween s tatic, expanding , and shrinking
univ erses:
• (static univ erse)
• (expanding univ erse)
• (shrinking univ erse)
The sc ale factor aand the cur vature kare determine d from Eins tein ’s general theor y of rela tivity . If w e tre at
the univ erse as a g as o f galaxies o f density and pres sure p, and as sume (a fla t univ erse), than the sc ale
factor ais giv en b y
where Gis the univ ersal gra vitational c onstant . (For ordinar y ma tter, we expect the quantity to b e
greater than z ero.) If the sc ale factor is p ositiv e ( ), the v alue o f the sc ale factor “ decelera tes”
( ), and the e xpansion o f the univ erse slo ws do wn o ver time . If the numera tor is les s than z ero
(someho w, the pres sure o f the univ erse is neg ative), the v alue o f the sc ale factor “ accelera tes,” and the
expansion o f the univ erse sp eeds up o ver time . According to rec ent c osmologic al da ta, the univ erse app ears to
be expanding . Man y scientis ts explain the current s tate of the univ erse in terms o f a v ery rapid e xpansion in
the e arly univ erse . This e xpansion is c alled infla tion .
11.7 Evolution o f the Early Univ erse
Learning Objectiv es
By the end o f this section, y ou wil l be able t o:
•Describe the e volution o f the early univ erse in terms o f the f our fundamental f orces
•Use the concep t of gravitational lensing to e xplain as tronomical phenomena
•Provide e vidence o f the Big Bang in terms o f cosmic back ground r adiation
•Distinguish be tween dark mat ter and dark ener gy
In the previous section , we discus sed the s tructure and dynamics o f univ erse . In p articular , the univ erse
app ears to b e expanding and ev en ac celera ting . But wha t was the univ erse lik e at the b eginning o f time? In this
section , we discus s wha t evidenc e scientis ts ha ve been a ble to g ather a bout the e arly univ erse and its ev olution
to present time .
The Early Univ erse
Before the shor t perio d of cosmic infla tion , cosmologis ts believ e tha t all ma tter in the univ erse w as squee zed11.13
11.14
11.1511.7 • Ev olution o f the Early Univ erse 525

into a sp ace much smaller than an a tom . Cosmologis ts fur ther b eliev e tha t the univ erse w as e xtremely dense
and hot , and interactions b etween p articles w ere g overne d by a single f orce. In other w ords , the f our
fundamental f orces (s trong nucle ar, electroma gnetic , weak nucle ar, and gra vitational) merg e into one a t these
energies ( Figure 11.21 ). Ho w and wh y this “unity ” bre aks do wn a t lower energies is an imp ortant unsolv ed
problem in ph ysics .
Figur e11.21 The separ ation o f the f our fundamental f orces in the earl y univ erse .
Scientific mo dels o f the e arly univ erse are highly sp ecula tive.Figure 11.22 shows a sk etch o f one p ossible
timeline o f events .
Figur e11.22 An appr oximat e timeline f or the e volution o f the univ erse fr om the Big Bang t o the pr esent.
1. Big Bang The current la ws of ph ysics bre ak do wn. At the end o f the initial Big Bang ev ent, the
temp erature o f the univ erse is appro xima tely
2. Infla tionar y phase The univ erse e xpands e xponentially , and gra vity sep arates from the
other f orces. The univ erse c ools to appro xima tely
3. Age of leptons As the univ erse c ontinues to e xpand , the s trong nucle ar force sep arates526 11 • P article Phy sics and C osmology
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

from the electroma gnetic and w eak nucle ar forces (or electro weak force). So on a fter, the w eak nucle ar force
separates from the electroma gnetic f orce. The univ erse is a hot soup o f quarks , leptons , photons , and other
particles .
4. Age of nucleons The univ erse c onsis ts of leptons and hadrons (such as protons , neutrons ,
and mesons) in thermal e quilibrium . Pair pro duction and p air annihila tion o ccurs with e qual e ase, so photons
remain in thermal e quilibrium:
The numb er o f protons is appro xima tely e qual to the numb er o f neutrons through interactions with neutrinos:
The temp erature o f the univ erse set tles to appro xima tely —much to o cool for the c ontinue d pro duction
of nucleon-antinucleon p airs . The numb ers o f protons and neutrons b egin to domina te over their anti-
particles , so proton-antiproton and neutron-antineutron ( ) annihila tions decline . Deuterons (proton-
neutron p airs) b egin to f orm .
5. Age of nucleos ynthesis ( to 1000 y ears): As the univ erse c ontinues to e xpand , deuterons re act with
protons and neutrons to f orm larg er nuclei; these larg er nuclei re act with protons and neutrons to f orm s till
larg er nuclei . At the end o f this p erio d, about 1/4 o f the mas s of the univ erse is helium . (This e xplains the
current amount o f helium in the univ erse .) Photons lack the energ y to c ontinue electron-p ositron pro duction ,
so electrons and p ositrons annihila te each other to photons only .
6. Age of ions ( to 3000 y ears): The univ erse is hot enough to ioniz e an y atoms f orme d. The univ erse
consis ts of electrons , positrons , protons , light nuclei , and photons .
7. Age of atoms ( to 300,000 y ears): The univ erse c ools b elow and a toms f orm . Photons do not
interact s trongly with neutral a toms , so the y “decouple ” (sep arate) from a toms . These photons c onstitute the
cosmic micro wave background radiat ion to b e discus sed later.
8. Age of stars and g alaxies ( years to present): The a toms and p articles are pulle d tog ether b y gra vity
and f orm larg e lumps . The a toms and p articles in s tars underg o nucle ar fusion re action .
INTER ACTIVE
Watch this video (https:/ /openstax.org/l/21bigb ang )to le arn more a bout Big Bang c osmolog y.
To describ e the c onditions o f the e arly univ erse quantita tively, rec all the rela tionship b etween the a verage
thermal energ y of particle ( E) in a s ystem o f interacting p articles and e quilibrium temp erature ( T) of tha t
system:
where is Boltzmann ’s constant . In the hot c onditions o f the e arly univ erse , particle energies w ere
unima gina bly larg e.11.1611.7 • Ev olution o f the Early Univ erse 527

EXAMPLE 11.9
Wha t Was the A verage Thermal Ener gy of a P article jus t aft er the Big Bang?
Strategy
The a verage thermal energ y of a p article in a s ystem o f interacting p articles dep ends on the e quilibrium
temp erature o f tha t system Equa tion 11.1 . We are giv en this appro xima te temp erature in the a bove timeline .
Solution
Cosmologis ts think the temp erature o f the univ erse jus t after the Big Bang w as appro xima tely
Theref ore, the a verage thermal energ y of a p article w ould ha ve been
Significanc e
This energ y is man y orders o f ma gnitude larg er than p article energies pro duced by human-made p article
accelera tors . Currently , these ac celera tors op erate at energies les s than
CHE CK Y OUR UNDER STANDING 11.9
Comp are the a bundanc e of helium b y mas s 10,000 y ears a fter the Big Bang and no w.
Nucleons f orm a t energies appro xima tely e qual to the res t mas s of a proton , or 1000 Me V. The temp erature
corresp onding to this energ y is theref ore
Temp eratures o f this v alue or higher e xisted within the firs t sec ond o f the e arly univ erse . A similar analy sis
can b e done f or a toms . Atoms f orm a t an energ y equal to the ioniza tion energ y of ground-s tate hydrog en (13
eV). The eff ectiv e temp erature f or a tom f orma tion is theref ore
This o ccurs w ell a fter the f our fundamental f orces ha ve sep arated, including f orces nec essary to bind the
protons and neutrons in the nucleus (s trong nucle ar force), and bind electrons to the nucleus (electroma gnetic
force).
Nucleos ynthesis o f Light Elements
The rela tive abundanc es o f the light elements h ydrog en, helium , lithium , and b eryllium in the univ erse
provide k ey evidenc e for the Big Bang . The da ta sugg est tha t much o f the helium in the univ erse is primordial .
For ins tanc e, it turns out tha t tha t 25% o f the ma tter in the univ erse is helium , which is to o high an a bundanc e
and c annot b e explaine d based on the pro duction o f helium in s tars .
How much o f the elements in the univ erse w ere cre ated in the Big Bang? If y ou r un the clo ck b ackw ard, the
univ erse b ecomes more and more c ompres sed, and hot ter and hot ter. Eventually , temp eratures are re ache d
that permit nucleosynthesis , the p erio d of forma tion o f nuclei , similar to wha t occurs a t the c ore o f the Sun .
Big Bang nucleos ynthesis is b eliev ed to ha ve occurre d within a f ew hundre d sec onds o f the Big Bang .
How did Big Bang nucleos ynthesis o ccur? A t firs t, protons and neutrons c ombine d to f orm deuterons , . The
deuteron c apture d a neutron to f orm triton , —the nucleus o f the radio activ e hydrog en c alled tritium .
Deuterons also c apture d protons to mak e helium . When captures a proton or captures a neutron ,
helium results . At this s tage in the Big Bang , the ra tio o f protons to neutrons w as a bout 7:1. Thus , the
process of conversion to used up almos t all neutrons . The pro cess las ted about 3 minutes and almos t
of all the ma tter turne d into , along with small p ercenta ges o f , , and . Tin y amounts o f and528 11 • P article Phy sics and C osmology
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

were also f orme d. The e xpansion during this time c ooled the univ erse enough tha t the nucle ar re actions
stopp ed. The a bundanc es o f the light nuclei , , and created after the Big Bang are v ery dep endent on
the ma tter density .
The pre dicte d abundanc es o f the elements in the univ erse pro vide a s tring ent tes t of the Big Bang and the Big
Bang nucleos ynthesis . Recent e xperimental es tima tes o f the ma tter density from the Wilkinson Micro wave
Anisotrop y Probe (WMAP) agree with mo del pre dictions . This a greement pro vides c onvincing evidenc e of the
Big Bang mo del.
Cosmic Micr owave Back ground Radiation
According to c osmologic al mo dels , the Big Bang ev ent should ha ve left b ehind thermal radia tion c alled the
cosmic micro wave background radia tion (CMBR). The intensity o f this radia tion should f ollow the blackb ody
radia tion cur ve (Photons and Ma tter W aves). W ien’s law states tha t the w avelength o f the radia tion a t peak
intensity is
where Tis temp erature in k elvins . Scientis ts expecte d the e xpansion o f the univ erse to “ stretch the light ,” and
the temp erature to b e very low, so c osmic b ackground radia tion should b e long-w avelength and lo w energ y.
In the 1960s , Arno Penzias and R obertWilson of Bell La boratories notic ed tha t no ma tter wha t the y did , the y
could not g et rid o f a faint b ackground noise in their sa tellite c ommunic ation s ystem . The noise w as due to
radia tion with w avelengths in the c entimeter rang e (the micro wave region). La ter, this noise w as as sociated
with the c osmic b ackground radia tion . An intensity map o f the c osmic b ackground radia tion app ears in Figure
11.23 . The thermal sp ectr um is mo dele d well b y a blackb ody cur ve tha t corresp onds to a temp erature
(Figure 11.24 ).
Figur e11.23 This map o f the sky uses c olor t o sho w fluctuations , or wrinkles , in the c osmic micr owave back ground obser ved with the
WMAP spac ecraft. The Milky W ay has been r emo ved for clarity . Red represents higher t emper atur e and higher density , wher eas blue
indicat es lo wer temper atur e and density . This map does not c ontr adict the earlier claim o f smoothnes s because the lar gest fluctuations ar e
only one par t in one mil lion. (cr edit: NASA/WMAP Scienc e Team)11.1711.7 • Ev olution o f the Early Univ erse 529

Figur e11.24 Intensity dis tribution o f cosmic micr owave back ground r adiation. The model pr edictions (the line) agr ee e xtremel y well with
the e xperimental r esul ts (the dots). F requency and brightnes s values ar e sho wn on a log axis . (credit: modification o f work b y Geor ge
Smoot/NASA C OBE P roject)
The f orma tion o f atoms in the e arly univ erse mak es these a toms les s lik ely to interact with light . Theref ore,
photons tha t belong to the c osmic b ackground radia tion mus t ha ve sep arated from ma tter a t a temp erature T
associated with 1 e V (the appro xima te ioniza tion energ y of an a tom) . The temp erature o f the univ erse a t this
point w as
According to c osmologic al mo dels , the time when photons las t scattere d oﬀ charg ed particles w as
appro xima tely 380,000 y ears a fter the Big Bang . Bef ore tha t time , ma tter in the univ erse w as in the plasma
form and the photons w ere “ thermaliz ed.”
Antimat ter and Mat ter
We kno w from direct obser vation tha t antima tter is rare . Ear th and the solar s ystem are ne arly pure ma tter,
and mos t of the univ erse also seems domina ted by ma tter. This is pro ven b y the lack o f annihila tion radia tion
coming to us from sp ace, particularly the rela tive absenc e of 0.511-Me Vrays cre ated by the mutual
annihila tion o f electrons and p ositrons . (Antima tter in na ture is cre ated in p article c ollisions and in decays,
but only in small amounts tha t quickly annihila te, leaving almos t pure ma tter sur viving .)
Despite the obser ved dominanc e of ma tter o ver antima tter in the univ erse , the Standard Mo del o f particle
interactions and e xperimental me asurement sugg ests only small diff erenc es in the w ays tha t ma tter and
antima tter interact . For e xample , neutral kaon dec ays pro duce only slightly more ma tter than antima tter. Yet,
if through such dec ay, slightly more ma tter than antima tter w as pro duced in the e arly univ erse , the res t could
annihila te p air b y pair, leaving mos tly ordinar y ma tter to f orm the s tars and g alaxies . In this w ay, the v ast530 11 • P article Phy sics and C osmology
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

numb er o f stars w e obser ve ma y be only a tin y remnant o f the original ma tter cre ated in the Big Bang .
Dark Mat ter and Dark Ener gy
In the las t two dec ades , new and more p owerful techniques ha ve rev ealed tha t the univ erse is fille d with dark
matter . This typ e of ma tter is interes ting and imp ortant b ecause, currently , scientis ts do not kno w wha t it is!
However, we can inf er its e xistenc e by the deflection o f dis tant s tarlight . For e xample , if light from a dis tant
galaxy is b ent b y the gra vitational field o f a clump o f dark ma tter b etween us and the g alaxy , it is p ossible tha t
two ima ges o f the same g alaxy c an b e pro duced (Figure 11.25 ). The b ending o f light b y the gra vitational field o f
matter is c alled gra vitational lensing . In some c ases , the s tarlight tra vels to an obser ver b y multiple p aths
around the g alaxy , pro ducing a ring ( Figure 11.26 ).
Base d on current rese arch , scientis t kno w only tha t dark ma tter is c old, slo w mo ving , and interacts w eakly
with ordinar y ma tter. Dark ma tter c andida tes include neutralinos (p artners o f Z b osons , photons , and Higgs
bosons in “ supersymmetr y theor y”) and p articles tha t circula te in tin y rings set up b y extra sp atial
dimensions .
Figur e11.25 Light fr om a dis tant s tar is bent ar ound a g alaxy . Under the right c onditions , two duplicat e imag es o f the same s tar can be
seen.
Figur e11.26 Light fr om a dis tant s tar is bent ar ound a g alaxy . Under the right c onditions , we can see a ring o f light ins tead o f a single s tar.11.7 • Ev olution o f the Early Univ erse 531

(credit: modification o f work b y ESA/Hubble & NASA)
Incre asingly precise as tronomic al me asurements o f the e xpanding univ erse also rev eal the presenc e of a new
form o f energ y calleddark ener gy. This energ y is thought to e xplain larg er-than-e xpecte d values f or the
obser ved galactic re dshifts f or dis tant g alaxies . These re dshifts sugg est tha t the univ erse is not only
expanding , but e xpanding a t an incre asing ra te. Virtually nothing is kno wn a bout the na ture and prop erties o f
dark energ y. Together , dark energ y and dark ma tter represent tw o of the mos t interes ting and unsolv ed
puzzles o f mo dern ph ysics . Scientis ts attribute of the energ y of the univ erse to dark energ y, to
dark ma tter, and jus t to the mas s-energ y of ordinar y particles ( Figure 11.27 ). Giv en the current gre at
mystery over the na ture o f dark ma tter and dark energ y, Isaac N ewton ’s humble w ords are as tr ue no w as the y
were c enturies a go:
“I do not kno w wha t I ma y app ear to the w orld , but to m yself I seem to ha ve been only lik e a b oy pla ying on the
sea-shore , and div erting m yself in no w and then finding a smo other p ebble or a pret tier shell than ordinar y,
whils t the gre at ocean o f truth la y all undisc overed before me .”
Figur e11.27 Estimat ed dis tribution o f mat ter and ener gy in the univ erse . (credit: NASA/WMAP Scienc e Team)532 11 • P article Phy sics and C osmology
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

CHAP TER RE VIEW
Key Terms
antiparticle subatomic p article with the same
mas s and lif etime as its as sociated particle , but
opp osite electric charg e
baryon numb er baryon numb er has the v alue
for b aryons, for antib aryons, and 0 f or
all other p articles and is c onser ved in p article
interactions
baryons group o f three quarks
Big Bang rapid e xpansion o f space tha t mark ed the
beginning o f the univ erse
boson particle with integral spin tha t are
symmetric on e xchang e
color prop erty of particles and tha t pla ys the same
role in s trong nucle ar interactions as electric
charg e do es in electroma gnetic interactions
cosmic micro wave background radiat ion (CMBR)
thermal radia tion pro duced by the Big Bang ev ent
cosmolog ystudy o f the origin , evolution , and
ultima te fa te of the univ erse
dark ener gyform o f energ y believ ed to b e
resp onsible f or the obser ved ac celera tion o f the
univ erse
dark matter matter in the univ erse tha t do es not
interact with other p articles but tha t can b e
inferre d by deflection o f dis tanc e star light
electro weak f orceunific ation o f electroma gnetic
force and w eak-nucle ar force interactions
exchang e symmetr yprop erty of a s ystem o f
indis tinguisha ble p articles tha t requires the
exchang e of an y tw o particles to b e unobser vable
fermion particle with half -integral spin tha t is
antis ymmetric on e xchang e
Feynman dia gram space-time dia gram tha t
describ es ho w particles mo ve and interact
fundamental f orceone o f four f orces tha t act
between b odies o f ma tter: the s trong nucle ar,
electroma gnetic , weak nucle ar, and gra vitational
forces
gluon particle tha t tha t carry the s trong nucle ar
force between quarks within an a tomic nucleus
grand unifie d theor ytheor y of particle
interactions tha t unifies the s trong nucle ar,
electroma gnetic , and w eak nucle ar forces
hadron a meson or b aryon
Hubble ’s cons tant constant tha t rela tes sp eed and
distanc e in Hubble ’s law
Hubble ’s law rela tionship b etween the sp eed and
distanc e of stars and g alaxies
lepton a fermion tha t particip ates in the
electro weak forcelepton numb er electron-lepton numb er the
muon-lepton numb er and the ta u-lepton
numb er are c onser ved sep arately in ev ery
particle interaction
mesons a group o f two quarks
nucleosynthesis creation o f he avy elements ,
occurring during the Big Bang
particle ac celerator machine designe d to
accelera te charg ed particles; this ac celera tion is
usually achiev ed with s trong electric fields ,
magnetic fields , or b oth
particle detector detector designe d to ac cura tely
measure the outc ome o f collisions cre ated by a
particle ac celera tor; p article detectors are
hermetic and multipurp ose
positron antielectron
quantum chromo dynamics (QCD) theor y tha t
describ es strong interactions b etween quarks
quantum electro dynamics (QED) theor y tha t
describ es the interaction o f electrons with
photons
quark a fermion tha t particip ates in the
electro weak and s trong nucle ar force
redshift lengthening o f the w avelength o f light (or
reddening ) due to c osmologic al expansion
Standard Mo del model o f particle interactions tha t
contains the electro weak theor y and quantum
chromo dynamics (Q CD)
strang enes sparticle prop erty as sociated with the
presenc e of a s trang e quark
strong nucle ar forcerela tively s trong a ttractiv e
force tha t acts o ver shor t dis tanc es (a bout
m) resp onsible f or binding protons and neutrons
together in a tomic nuclei
synchrotron circular ac celera tor tha t uses
alterna ting v olta ge and incre asing ma gnetic field
strengths to ac celera te p articles to higher and
higher energies
synchrotron radiat ion high-energ y radia tion
produced in a s ynchrotron ac celera tor b y the
circular motion o f a charg ed beam
theor y of e verything a theor y of particle
interactions tha t unifies all f our fundamental
forces
virtual p article particle tha t exists for to o shor t of
time to b e obser vable
W and Z b oson particle with a rela tively larg e mas s
that carries the w eak nucle ar force between
leptons and quarks
weak nucle ar forcerela tive weak force (about11 • Chap ter Re view 533

the s trength o f the s trong nucle ar force)
resp onsible f or dec ays of elementar y particlesand neutrino interactions
Key Equations
Momentum o f a charg ed particle in a cy clotron
Center -of-mas s energ y of a c olliding b eam machine
Appro xima te time f or e xchang e of a vir tual p article
between tw o other p articles
Hubble ’s law
Cosmologic al sp ace-time metric
Summar y
11.1 Introduc tion to P article Phy sics
•The f our fundamental f orces o f na ture are , in
order o f strength: s trong nucle ar,
electroma gnetic , weak nucle ar, and
gravitational . Quarks interact via the s trong
force, but leptons do not . Both quark and
leptons interact via the electroma gnetic , weak,
and gra vitational f orces.
•Elementar y particles are clas sifie d into
fermions and b oson . Fermions ha ve half -
integral spin and ob ey the e xclusion principle .
Bosons ha ve integral spin and do not ob ey this
principle . Bosons are the f orce carriers o f
particle interactions .
•Quarks and leptons b elong to p article families
comp osed of three memb ers e ach. Memb ers o f a
family share man y prop erties (charg e, spin ,
particip ation in f orces) but not mas s.
•All particles ha ve antip articles . Particles share
the same prop erties as their antima tter
particles , but c arry opp osite charg e.
11.2 Particle C onser vation L aws
•Elementar y particle interactions are g overne d
by particle c onser vation la ws, which c an b e
used to determine wha t particle re actions and
decays are p ossible (or f orbidden).
•The b aryon numb er conser vation la w and the
three lepton numb er conversa tion la w are v alid
for all ph ysical pro cesses. Ho wever,
conser vation o f strang enes s is v alid only f or
strong nucle ar interactions and electroma gnetic
interactions .11.3 Quark s
•Six kno wn quarks e xist: up ( u), do wn ( d), charm
(c), strang e (s), top ( t), and b ottom ( b). These
particles are f ermions with half -integral spin
and fractional charg e.
•Baryons c onsis t of three quarks , and mesons
consis t of a quark -antiquark p air. Due to the
strong f orce, quarks c annot e xist in isola tion .
•Evidenc e for quarks is f ound in sc attering
experiments .
11.4 Particle Acceler ators and De tectors
•Man y typ es o f particle ac celera tors ha ve been
develop ed to s tudy p articles and their
interactions . These include line ar ac celera tors ,
cyclotrons , synchrotrons , and c olliding b eams .
•Colliding b eam machines are use d to cre ate
mas sive particles tha t dec ay quickly to lighter
particles .
•Multipurp ose detectors are use d to design all
aspects o f high-energ y collisions . These include
detectors to me asure the momentum and
energies o f charg e particles and photons .
•Charg ed particles are me asure d by bending
these p articles in a circle b y a ma gnetic field .
•Particles are me asure d using c alorimeters tha t
absorb the p articles .
11.5 The S tandar d Model
•The Standard Mo del describ es interactions
between p articles through the s trong nucle ar,
electroma gnetic , and w eak nucle ar forces.
•Particle interactions are represente d by534 11 • Chap ter Re view
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Feynman dia grams . A F eynman dia gram
represents interactions b etween p articles on a
space-time graph .
•Electroma gnetic f orces act o ver a long rang e,
but s trong and w eak forces act o ver a shor t
rang e. These f orces are transmit ted between
particles b y sending and rec eiving b osons .
•Grand unifie d theories seek an unders tanding o f
the univ erse in terms o f jus t one f orce.
11.6 The Big Bang
•The univ erse is e xpanding lik e a b alloon— every
point is rec eding from ev ery other p oint .
•Distant g alaxies mo ve away from us a t a v elocity
prop ortional to its dis tanc e. This ra te is
measure d to b e appro xima tely 70 km/s /Mp c.Thus , the far ther g alaxies are from us , the
greater their sp eeds. These “rec essional
velocities” c an b e me asure using the Doppler
shift o f light .
•According to current c osmologic al mo dels , the
univ erse b egan with the Big Bang appro xima tely
13.7 billion y ears a go.
11.7 Evolution o f the Early Univ erse
•The e arly univ erse w as hot and dense .
•The univ erse is isotropic and e xpanding .
•Cosmic b ackground radia tion is evidenc e for the
Big Bang .
•The v ast portion o f the mas s and energ y of the
univ erse is not w ell unders tood.
Concep tual Ques tions
11.1 Introduc tion to P article Phy sics
1.Wha t are the f our fundamental f orces? Briefly
describ e them .
2.Distinguish f ermions and b osons using the
concepts o f indis tiguisha bility and e xchang e
symmetr y.
3.List the quark and lepton families
4.Distinguish b etween elementar y particles and
antip articles . Describ e their interactions .
11.2 Particle C onser vation L aws
5.Wha t are six p article c onser vation la ws? Briefly
describ e them .
6.In g eneral , how do w e determine if a p article
reaction or dec ay occurs?
7.Why might the detection o f particle interaction
that viola tes an es tablishe d particle c onser vation
law be considere d agoodthing f or a scientis t?
11.3 Quark s
8.Wha t are the six kno wn quarks? Summariz e their
prop erties.
9.Wha t is the g eneral quark c omp osition o f a
baryon? Of a meson?
10.Wha t evidenc e exists for the e xistenc e of
quarks?
11.Why do b aryons with the same quark
comp osition sometimes diff er in their res t mas s
energies?
11.4 Particle Acceler ators and De tectors
12.Briefly c omp are the V an de Graa ff ac celera tor,line ar ac celera tor, cyclotron , and s ynchrotron
accelera tor.
13.Describ e the b asic c omp onents and function o f
a typic al colliding b eam machine .
14.Wha t are the sub detectors o f the C omp act Muon
Solenoid e xperiment? Briefly describ e them .
15.Wha t is the adv anta ge of a c olliding-b eam
accelera tor o ver one tha t fires p articles into a
fixed targ et?
16.An electron app ears in the muon detectors o f
the CMS. Ho w is this p ossible?
11.5 The S tandar d Model
17.Wha t is the Standard Mo del? Expres s your
answer in terms o f the f our fundamental f orces
and e xchang e particles .
18.Draw a F eynman dia gram to represents
annihila tion o f an electron and p ositron into a
photon .
19.Wha t is the motiv ation b ehind grand unific ation
theories?
20.If a theor y is dev elop ed tha t unifies all f our
forces, will it s till b e correct to sa y tha t the orbit
of the Mo on is determine d by the gra vitational
force? Explain wh y.
21.If the Higgs b oson is disc overed and f ound to
have mas s, will it b e considere d the ultima te
carrier o f the w eak force? Explain y our
resp onse .
22.One o f the c ommon dec ay mo des o f the
Even though only hadrons
are in volved in this dec ay, it o ccurs through the
weak nucle ar force. Ho w do w e kno w tha t this
decay do es not o ccur through the s trong11 • Chap ter Re view 535

nucle ar force?
11.6 The Big Bang
23.Wha t is me ant b y cosmologic al expansion?
Expres s your ans wer in terms o f a Hubble graph
and the re d shift o f dis tant s tarlight .
24.Describ e the b alloon analog y for c osmologic al
expansion . Explain wh y it only app earsthat we
are a t the c enter o f expansion o f the univ erse .
25.Distanc es to lo cal galaxies are determine d by
measuring the brightnes s of stars , called
Cepheid v aria bles , tha t can b e obser ved
individually and tha t ha ve absolute
brightnes ses a t a s tandard dis tanc e tha t are w ell
kno wn. Explain ho w the me asure d brightnes s
would v ary with dis tanc e, as c omp ared with the
absolute brightnes s.
11.7 Evolution o f the Early Univ erse
26.Wha t is me ant b y a “ cosmologic al mo del o f theearly univ erse? ” Briefly describ e this mo del in
terms o f the f our fundamental f orces.
27.Describ e tw o piec es o f evidenc e tha t supp ort the
Big Bang mo del.
28.In wha t sense are w e, as N ewton onc e said , “a
boy pla ying on the se a-shore ”? Expres s your
answer in terms o f the c oncepts o f dark ma tter
and dark energ y.
29.If some unkno wn c ause o f redshift —such as
light b ecoming “ tired” from tra veling long
distanc es through empty sp ace—is disc overed,
wha t eff ect w ould tha t ha ve on c osmolog y?
30.In the p ast, man y scientis ts believ ed the
univ erse to b e infinite . Ho wever, if the univ erse
is infinite , then an y line o f sight should
eventually fall on a s tar’s sur face and the night
sky should b e very bright . Ho w is this p arado x
resolv ed in mo dern c osmolog y?
Problems
11.1 Introduc tion to P article Phy sics
31.How much energ y is rele ased when an electron
and a p ositron a t res t annihila te each other?
(For p article mas ses, see Table 11.1 .)
32.If of energ y is rele ased in the
annihila tion o f a sphere o f ma tter and
antima tter, and the spheres are e qual mas s,
wha t are the mas ses o f the spheres?
33.When b oth an electron and a p ositron are a t
rest, the y can annihila te each other ac cording to
the re action
In this c ase, wha t are the energ y, momentum ,
and fre quency o f each photon?
34.Wha t is the total kinetic energ ycarrie d away by
the p articles o f the f ollowing dec ays?
11.2 Particle C onser vation L aws
35.Which o f the f ollowing dec ays cannot o ccur b ecause
the la w of conser vation o f lepton numb er is viola ted?36.Which o f the f ollowing re actions c annot b ecause the la w
of conser vation o f strang enes s is viola ted?
37.Identif y one p ossible dec ay for e ach o f the
following antip articles:
(a) , (b) , (c) , (d) , and (e) .
38.Each o f the f ollowing s trong nucle ar re actions is
forbidden . Identif y a c onser vation la w tha t is
viola ted for e ach one .
11.3 Quark s
39.Base d on quark c omp osition o f a proton , sho w536 11 • Chap ter Re view
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

that its charg e is .
40.Base d on the quark c omp osition o f a neutron ,
show tha t is charg e is 0.
41.Argue tha t the quark c omp osition giv en in Table
11.5 for the p ositiv e kaon is c onsis tent with the
kno wn charg e, spin , and s trang enes s of this
baryon.
42.Mesons are f orme d from the f ollowing
combina tions o f quarks (subscripts indic ate
color and ): , ( ),
and ( ).
(a) Determine the charg e and s trang enes s of
each c ombina tion . (b) Identif y one or more
mesons f orme d by each quark -antiquark
combina tion .
43.Why can’t either set o f quarks sho wn b elow
form a hadron?
44.Exp erimental results indic ate an isola te p article
with charg e —an isola ted quark . Wha t
quark c ould this b e? Wh y would this disc overy
be imp ortant?
45.Expres s the decays and
in terms o fdecays of quarks .
Check to see tha t the c onser vation la ws for
charg e, lepton numb er, and b aryon numb er are
satisfied by the quark decays.
11.4 Particle Acceler ators and De tectors
46.A charg ed particle in a 2.0- T ma gnetic field is
bent in a circle o f radius 75 cm . Wha t is the
momentum o f the p article?
47.A proton track p asses through a ma gnetic field
with radius o f 50 cm . The ma gnetic field
strength is 1.5 T . Wha t is the total energ y of the
proton?
48.Deriv e the e qua tion using the
concepts o f centrip etal ac celera tion ( Motion in
Two and Three Dimensions ) and rela tivis tic
momentum ( Relativity )
49.Assume tha t beam energ y of an electron-positron c ollider is appro xima tely 4.73 Ge V.
Wha t is the total mas s (W) of a p article
produced in the annihila tion o f an electron and
positron in this c ollider? Wha t meson might b e
produced?
50.At full energ y, protons in the 2.00-km-diameter
Fermila b synchrotron tra vel at ne arly the sp eed
of light , sinc e their energ y is a bout 1000 times
their res t mas s energ y. (a) Ho w long do es it tak e
for a proton to c omplete one trip around? ( b)
How man y times p er sec ond will it p ass through
the targ et are a?
51.Supp ose a created in a p article detector
lives for . Wha t dis tanc e do es it
move in this time if it is tra veling a t 0.900 c?
(Note tha t the time is long er than the giv en
lifetime , which c an b e due to the s tatistical
nature o f dec ay or time dila tion .)
52.Wha t length track do es a traveling a t 0.100 c
leave in a bubble chamb er if it is cre ated there
and liv es for ? (Those mo ving
faster or living long er ma y esc ape the detector
before dec aying .)
53.The 3.20-km-long SL AC pro duces a b eam o f
50.0- GeV electrons . If there are 15,000
accelera ting tub es, wha t average volta ge mus t
be acros s the g aps b etween them to achiev e this
energ y?
11.5 The S tandar d Model
54.Using the Heisenb erg unc ertainly principle ,
determine the rang e of the w eak force if this
force is pro duced by the e xchang e of a Z b oson .
55.Use the Heisenb erg unc ertainly principle to
estima te the rang e of a w eak nucle ar dec ay
involving a gra viton .
56.(a) The f ollowing dec ay is me diated by the
electro weak force:
Draw the F eynman dia gram f or the dec ay.
(b) The f ollowing sc attering is me diated by the
electro weak force:
Draw the F eynman dia gram f or the sc attering .
57.Assuming c onser vation o f momentum , wha t is
the energ y of each ray pro duced in the dec ay
of a neutral pion a t res t, in the re action
?
58.Wha t is the w avelength o f a 50- GeV electron ,
which is pro duced at SL AC? This pro vides an
idea of the limit to the detail it c an prob e.
59.The primar y dec ay mo de for the neg ative pion11 • Chap ter Re view 537

is (a) Wha t is the energ y rele ase
in Me V in this dec ay? (b) U sing c onser vation o f
momentum , how much energ y do es e ach o f the
decay pro ducts rec eive, giv en the is at res t
when it dec ays? Y ou ma y as sume the muon
antineutrino is mas sles s and has momentum
, jus t lik e a photon .
60.Supp ose y ou are designing a proton dec ay
experiment and y ou c an detect 50 p ercent o f
the proton dec ays in a tank o f water. (a) Ho w
man y kilograms o f water w ould y ou nee d to see
one dec ay per month , assuming a lif etime o f
(b) Ho w man y cubic meters o f water is
this? (c) If the actual lif etime is , how long
would y ou ha ve to w ait on an a verage to see a
single proton dec ay?
11.6 The Big Bang
61.If the sp eed of a dis tant g alaxy is 0.99 c, wha t is
the dis tanc e of the g alaxy from an Ear th-b ound
obser ver?
62.The dis tanc e of a g alaxy from our solar s ystem
is 10 Mp c. (a) Wha t is the rec essional v elocity o f
the g alaxy? ( b) B y wha t fraction is the s tarlight
from this g alaxy re dshifte d (tha t is, wha t is its z
value)?
63.If a g alaxy is 153 Mp c away from us , how fas t do
we expect it to b e mo ving and in wha t direction?
64.On a verage, how far a way are g alaxies tha t are
moving a way from us a t of the sp eed of
light?
65.Our solar s ystem orbits the c enter o f the Milky
Way Galaxy . Assuming a circular orbit 30,000 lyin radius and an orbital sp eed of 250 km/s , how
man y years do es it tak e for one rev olution? N ote
that this is appro xima te, assuming c onstant
speed and circular orbit , but it is representa tive
of the time f or our s ystem and lo cal stars to
mak e one rev olution around the g alaxy .
66.(a) Wha t is the appro xima te velocity rela tive to
us o f a g alaxy ne ar the e dge of the kno wn
univ erse , some 10 Gly a way? (b) Wha t fraction
of the sp eed of light is this? N ote tha t we ha ve
obser ved galaxies mo ving a way from us a t
greater than 0.9 c.
67.(a) C alcula te the appro xima te age of the
univ erse from the a verage value o f the Hubble
constant , . To do this ,
calcula te the time it w ould tak e to tra vel 0.307
Mpc at a c onstant e xpansion ra te of 20 km/s . (b)
If someho w ac celera tion o ccurs , would the
actual a ge of the univ erse b e gre ater or les s than
that found here? Explain .
68.The Androme da G alaxy is the closes t larg e
galaxy and is visible to the nak ed eye. Estima te
its brightnes s rela tive to the Sun , assuming it
has luminosity times tha t of the Sun and
lies 0.613 Mp c away.
69.Sho w tha t the v elocity o f a s tar orbiting its
galaxy in a circular orbit is in versely
prop ortional to the square ro ot of its orbital
radius , assuming the mas s of the s tars inside its
orbit acts lik e a single mas s at the c enter o f the
galaxy . You ma y use an e qua tion from a
previous chapter to supp ort your c onclusion ,
but y ou mus t jus tify its use and define all terms
used.
Additional P roblems
70.Exp erimental results sugg est tha t a muon
decays to an electron and photon . Ho w is this
possible?
71.Each o f the f ollowing re actions is mis sing a
single p article . Identif y the mis sing p article f or
each re action .72.Because o f energ y los s due to s ynchrotron
radia tion in the LHC a t CERN , only 5.00 Me V is
adde d to the energ y of each proton during e ach
revolution around the main ring . Ho w man y
revolutions are nee ded to pro duce 7.00- TeV
(7000 Ge V) protons , if the y are injecte d with an
initial energ y of 8.00 Ge V?
73.A proton and an antiproton c ollide he ad-on ,
with e ach ha ving a kinetic energ y of 7.00 T eV
(such as in the LHC a t CERN). Ho w much
collision energ y is a vailable, taking into ac count
the annihila tion o f the tw o mas ses? (N ote tha t
this is not signific antly gre ater than the
extremely rela tivis tic kinetic energ y.)538 11 • Chap ter Re view
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

74.When an electron and p ositron c ollide a t the
SLAC facility , the y each ha ve 50.0- GeV kinetic
energies . Wha t is the total c ollision energ y
available, taking into ac count the annihila tion
energ y? N ote tha t the annihila tion energ y is
insignific ant, because the electrons are highly
rela tivis tic.
75.The c ore o f a s tar c ollapses during a sup erno va,
forming a neutron s tar. Angular momentum o f
the c ore is c onser ved, so the neutron s tar spins
rapidly . If the initial c ore radius is
and it c ollapses to 10.0 km , find
the neutron s tar’s angular v elocity in
revolutions p er sec ond , giv en the c ore’s angular
velocity w as originally 1 rev olution p er 30.0
days.76.Using the solution from the previous problem ,
find the incre ase in rota tional kinetic energ y,
given the c ore’s mas s is 1.3 times tha t of our
Sun . Where do es this incre ase in kinetic energ y
come from?
77.(a) Wha t Hubble c onstant c orresp onds to an
appro xima te age of the univ erse o f y? T o
get an appro xima te value , assume the
expansion ra te is c onstant and c alcula te the
speed at which tw o galaxies mus t mo ve ap art to
be sep arated by 1 Mly (present a verage galactic
separation) in a time o f y. (b) Similarly ,
wha t Hubble c onstant c orresp onds to a
univ erse appro xima tely years old?
Challenge P roblems
78.Electrons and p ositrons are c ollide d in a
circular ac celera tor. Deriv e the e xpres sion f or
the c enter -of-mas s energ y of the p article .
79.The intensity o f cosmic ra y radia tion decre ases
rapidly with incre asing energ y, but there are
occasionally e xtremely energ etic c osmic ra ys
that cre ate a sho wer o f radia tion from all the
particles the y cre ate by striking a nucleus in the
atmosphere . Supp ose a c osmic ra y particle
having an energ y of converts its
energ y into p articles with mas ses a veraging
.
(a) Ho w man y particles are cre ated? (b) If the
particles rain do wn on a area, ho w
man y particles are there p er square meter?
80.(a) C alcula te the rela tivis tic quantity
for 1.00- TeV protons pro duced at
Fermila b. (b) If such a proton cre ated a
having the same sp eed, how long w ould its lif e
be in the la boratory? (c) Ho w far c ould it tra vel
in this time?
81.Plans f or an ac celera tor tha t pro duces a
secondar y beam o f K mesons to sc atter from
nuclei , for the purp ose o f studying the s trong
force, call for them to ha ve a kinetic energ y of
500 Me V. (a) Wha t would the rela tivis tic quantity
be for these p articles? ( b) Ho w
long w ould their a verage lifetime b e in the
laboratory? (c) Ho w far c ould the y tra vel in this
time?82.In sup erno vae, neutrinos are pro duced in hug e
amounts . The y were detecte d from the 1987A
superno va in the Ma gellanic Cloud , which is
about 120,000 light -years a way from Ear th
(rela tively close to our Milky W ay Galaxy ). If
neutrinos ha ve a mas s, the y cannot tra vel at the
speed of light , but if their mas s is small , their
velocity w ould b e almos t tha t of light . (a)
Supp ose a neutrino with a mas s has a
kinetic energ y of 700 k eV. Find the rela tivis tic
quantity for it . (b) If the neutrino
leaves the 1987A sup erno va at the same time as
a photon and b oth tra vel to Ear th, how much
sooner do es the photon arriv e? This is not a
larg e time diff erenc e, giv en tha t it is imp ossible
to kno w which neutrino left with which photon
and the p oor efficiency o f the neutrino
detectors . Thus , the fact tha t neutrinos w ere
obser ved within hours o f the brightening o f the
superno va only plac es an upp er limit on the
neutrino ’s mas s. (Hint: You ma y nee d to use a
series e xpansion to find vfor the neutrino , sinc e
its is so larg e.)
83.Assuming a circular orbit f or the Sun a bout the
center o f the Milky W ay Galaxy , calcula te its
orbital sp eed using the f ollowing inf orma tion:
The mas s of the g alaxy is e quiv alent to a single
mas s times tha t of the Sun (or
), located 30,000 ly a way.11 • Chap ter Re view 539

84.(a) Wha t is the appro xima te force of gra vity on a
70-k g person due to the Androme da G alaxy ,
assuming its total mas s is that of our Sun
and acts lik e a single mas s 0.613 Mp c away? (b)
Wha t is the ra tio o f this f orce to the p erson ’s
weight? N ote tha t Androme da is the closes t
larg e galaxy .
85.(a) A p article and its antip article are a t res t
rela tive to an obser ver and annihila te
(completely des troying b oth mas ses), cre ating
tworays of equal energ y. Wha t is the
characteris tic -ray energ y you w ould lo ok for if
searching f or evidenc e of proton-antiproton
annihila tion? ( The fact tha t such radia tion is
rarely obser ved is evidenc e tha t there is v ery
little antima tter in the univ erse .) (b) Ho w do es
this c omp are with the 0.511-Me V energ y
associated with electron-p ositron annihila tion?86.The p eak intensity o f the CMBR o ccurs a t a
wavelength o f 1.1 mm . (a) Wha t is the energ y in
eV of a 1.1-mm photon? ( b) There are
appro xima tely photons f or e ach mas sive
particle in deep sp ace. Calcula te the energ y of
such photons . (c) If the a verage mas sive
particle in sp ace has a mas s half tha t of a
proton , wha t energ y would b e cre ated by
converting its mas s to energ y? (d) Do es this
imply tha t space is “ma tter domina ted”?
Explain briefly .
87.(a) U se the Heisenb erg unc ertainty principle to
calcula te the unc ertainty in energ y for a
corresp onding time inter val of . (b)
Comp are this energ y with the
unific ation-o f-forces energ y and discus s wh y
they are similar .540 11 • Chap ter Re view
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

APPENDIX A
Units
Quantit y Common S ymbol Unit Unit in T erms o f Base SI Units
Accelera tion m/s2m/s2
Amount o f subs tanc e n mole mol
Angle radian (rad)
Angular ac celera tion rad/s2s−2
Angular fre quency rad/s s−1
Angular momentum
Angular v elocity rad/s s−1
Area A m2m2
Atomic numb er Z
Capacitanc e C farad (F)
Charg e q, Q, e coulomb (C)
Charg e density:
Line C/m
Surface C/m2
Volume C/m3
Conductivity
Current I amp ere A
Current density A/m2A/m2
Density kg/m3kg/m3
Dielectric c onstant
Electric dip ole momentA • Units 541

Quantit y Common S ymbol Unit Unit in T erms o f Base SI Units
Electric field N/C
Electric flux
Electromotiv e force volt ( V)
Energ y E,U,K joule (J )
Entrop y S J/K
Force newton (N)
Frequency f hertz (Hz) s−1
Heat Q joule (J )
Inductanc e L henr y (H)
Length: meter m
Displac ement
Distanc e d, h
Position
Magnetic dip ole moment
Magnetic field tesla ( T)
Magnetic flux weber (Wb)
Mas s m, M kilogram kg
Molar sp ecific he at C
Moment o f iner tia I
Momentum
Perio d T s s
Perme ability o f free sp ace
Permit tivity o f free sp ace
Potential V volt ( V)542 A • Units
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Quantit y Common S ymbol Unit Unit in T erms o f Base SI Units
Power P watt (W)
Pressure p pastcal (P)
Resis tanc e R ohm (Ω )
Specific he at c
Speed m/s m/s
Temp erature T kelvin K
Time t second s
Torque
Velocity m/s m/s
Volume V m3m3
Wavelength m m
Work W joule (J )
Table A1Units U sed in Ph ysics (F undamental units in b old)A • Units 543

544 A • Units
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

APPENDIX B
Conversion F actors
m cm km
1 meter 1 10210−3
1 centimeter 10−21 10−5
1 kilometer 1031051
1 inch 2.540
1 foot 0.3048 30.48
1 mile 1609 1.609
1 angs trom 10−10
1 fermi 10−15
1 light -year
in. ft mi
1 meter 39.37 3.281
1 centimeter 0.3937
1 kilometer 0.6214
1 inch 1
1 foot 12 1
1 mile 5280 1
Table B1Length
Are a
VolumeB • C onversion F actors545

s min h day yr
1 sec ond 1
1 minute 60 1
1 hour 3600 60 1
1 da y 1440 24 1
1 year 365.25 1
Table B2Time
m/s cm/s ft/s mi/h
1 meter /sec ond 1 1023.281 2.237
1 centimeter /sec ond 10−21
1 foot/sec ond 0.3048 30.48 1 0.6818
1 mile/hour 0.4470 44.70 1.467 1
Table B3Speed
Accelerat ion
kg g slug u
1 kilogram 1 103
1 gram 10−31
1 slug 14.59 1
1 atomic mas s unit 1
1 metric ton 1000
Table B4Mas s546 B • C onversion F actors
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

N dyne lb
newton 1 1050.2248
dyne 10−51
pound 4.448 1
Table B5Force
Pa dyne /cm2atm cmHg lb/in.2
1 pascal 1 10
1 dyne/c entimeter210−11
1 atmosphere 1 76 14.70
1 centimeter mercur y* 1 0.1934
1 pound/inch25.171 1
1 bar 105
1 torr 1 (mmHg )
*Where the ac celera tion due to gra vity is and the temp erature is
Table B6Pressure
J erg ft.lb
1 joule 1 1070.7376
1 erg 10−71
1 foot-pound 1.356 1
1 electron-v olt
1 calorie 4.186 3.088
1 British thermal unit
1 kilo watt-hour
eV cal Btu
1 joule 0.2389
1 ergB • C onversion F actors547

J erg ft.lb
1 foot-pound 0.3239
1 electron-v olt 1
1 calorie 1
1 British thermal unit 1
Table B7Work, Energ y, He at
Power
Angle548 B • C onversion F actors
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

APPENDIX C
Fundamental C onstants
Quantit y Symbol Value
Atomic mas s unit u
Avogadro ’s numb er
Bohr ma gnetonℏ
Bohr radiusℏ
Boltzmann ’s constant
Compton w avelength
Coulomb c onstant
Deuteron mas s
Electron mas s
Electron v olt eV
Elementar y charg e e
Gas c onstant R
Gravitational c onstant G
Neutron mas sC • F undamental C onstants 549

Quantit y Symbol Value
Nucle ar ma gnetonℏ
Perme ability o f free sp ace
Permit tivity o f free sp ace
Planck ’s constanth
ℏ
Proton mas s
Rydberg c onstant
Speed of light in v acuum c
Table C1Fundamental C onstants Note: These c onstants are the v alues rec ommende d in 2006 b y CODATA,
based on a le ast-squares adjus tment o f data from diff erent me asurements . The numb ers in p arentheses f or
the v alues represent the unc ertainties o f the las t two digits .
Useful c ombinat ions of c ons tants f or c alculat ions:
ℏ550 C • F undamental C onstants
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

APPENDIX D
Astronomical Data
Celestial
Objec tMean Dis tance fr om
Sun (million km)Period o f Revolution ( d =
days) (y = y ears)Period o f Rotation
at EquatorEccentricit y
of Orbit
Sun − − 27 d −
Mercur y 57.9 88 d 59 d 0.206
Venus 108.2 224.7 d 243 d 0.007
Earth 149.6 365.25 d 23 h 56 min 4 s 0.017
Mars 227.9 687 d 24 h 37 min 23 s 0.093
Jupiter 778.4 11.9 y 9 h 50 min 30 s 0.048
Saturn 1426.7 29.5 y 10 h 14 min 0.054
Uranus 2871.0 84.0 y 17 h 14 min 0.047
Neptune 4498.3 164.8 y 16 h 0.009
Earth’s
Moon149.6 (0.386 from Ear th) 27.3 d 27.3 d 0.055
Celes tial
ObjectEquatorial Diameter
(km)Mas s (Ear th = 1) Densit y (g/cm3)
Sun 1,392,000 333,000.00 1.4
Mercur y 4879 0.06 5.4
Venus 12,104 0.82 5.2
Earth 12,756 1.00 5.5
Mars 6794 0.11 3.9
Jupiter 142,984 317.83 1.3
Saturn 120,536 95.16 0.7
Uranus 51,118 14.54 1.3
Neptune 49,528 17.15 1.6D • A stronomical Data 551

Celestial
Objec tMean Dis tance fr om
Sun (million km)Period o f Revolution ( d =
days) (y = y ears)Period o f Rotation
at EquatorEccentricit y
of Orbit
Earth’s
Moon3476 0.01 3.3
Table D1Astronomic al Da ta
Other Data:
Mas s of Ear th:
Mas s of the Mo on:
Mas s of the Sun:552 D • A stronomical Data
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

APPENDIX E
Mathematical F ormulas
Quadrat ic formula
If then
Triangle o f base and height Area
Circle o f radius Circumf erenc e Area
Sphere o f radius Surface are a Volume
Cylinder o f radius and height Area of cur ved sur face Volume
Table E1Geometr y
Trigonometr y
Trigonometric Identities
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
Triangles
1. Law of sines:
2. Law of cosines:E • Mathematical F ormulas 553

3. Pytha gorean theorem:
Series e xpansions
1. Binomial theorem:
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
Deriv atives
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.554 E • Mathematical F ormulas
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

13.
14.
15.
16.
Integrals
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.E • Mathematical F ormulas 555

556 E • Mathematical F ormulas
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

APPENDIX F
Chemis try
F • Chemis try557

558 F • Chemis try
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

APPENDIX G
The Gr eek Alphabe t
Name Capital Lowercase Name Capital Lowercase
Alpha A Nu N
Beta B Xi
Gamma Omicron O
Delta Pi
Epsilon E Rho P
Zeta Z Sigma
Eta H Tau T
Theta Upsilon
lota I Phi
Kapp a K Chi X
Lamb da Psi
Mu M Omeg a
Table G1The Greek A lpha betG • The Gr eek Alphabe t559

ANS WER KEY
Chap ter 1
Check Y our Under standing
1.1 2.1% (to tw o signific ant figures)
1.2
1.3 air to w ater, because the c ondition tha t the sec ond me dium mus t ha ve a smaller inde x of refraction is not
satisfied
1.4 9.3 cm
1.5 becomes long er, tilts fur ther a way from the sur face, and the refracte d ra y tilts a way from the
normal .
1.6 also
1.7 There will b e only refraction but no reflection .
Concep tual Ques tions
1.Light c an b e mo dele d as a ra y when devic es are larg e comp ared to w avelength , and as a w ave when devic es
are c omp arable or small c omp ared to w avelength .
3.This fact simply pro ves tha t the sp eed of light is gre ater than tha t of sound . If one kno ws the dis tanc e to the
location o f the lightning and the sp eed of sound , one c ould , in principle , determine the sp eed of light from
the da ta. In practic e, because the sp eed of light is so gre at, the da ta w ould ha ve to b e kno wn to impractic ally
high precision .
5.Powder c onsis ts of man y small p articles with randomly oriente d sur faces. This le ads to diffuse reflection ,
reducing shine .
7.“toward” when incre asing n(air to w ater, water to glas s); “ away” when decre asing n(glas s to air)
9.A ra y from a leg emerg es from w ater a fter refraction . The obser ver in air p erceives an app arent lo cation f or
the sourc e, as if a ra y tra veled in a s traight line . See the dashe d ra y below.
11.The g ems tone b ecomes in visible when its inde x of refraction is the same , or a t least similar to , the w ater
surrounding it . Bec ause diamond has a p articularly high inde x of refraction , it c an s till sp arkle as a result
of total internal reflection , not in visible .
13.One c an me asure the critic al angle b y looking f or the onset o f total internal reflection as the angle o f
incidenc e is v arie d.Equa tion 1.5 can then b e applie d to c ompute the inde x of refraction .
15.In addition to total internal reflection , rays tha t refract into and out o f diamond cr ystals are subject to
disp ersion due to v arying v alues o f n acros s the sp ectr um, resulting in a sp arkling displa y of colors .
17.yes560
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

19.No. Sound w aves are not trans verse w aves.
21.Energ y is a bsorb ed into the filters .
23.Sunsets are view ed with light tra veling s traight from the Sun to ward us . When blue light is sc attere d out o f
this p ath, the remaining re d light domina tes the o verall app earanc e of the set ting Sun .
25.The axis o f polariza tion f or the sunglas ses has b een rota ted .
Problems
27. ;
29.ice at
31.1.03 ns
33.337 m
35.proof
37.proof
39.reflection , ; refraction ,
41.
43.1.53
45.a. 2.9 m; b . 1.4 m
47.a. ; b.
49.
51.a. 1.43, fluorite; b .
53.a. ; b.
55. for re d, for violet
57.a. ; b. 1.3 m
59.
61. for re d, for violet
63.0.500
65.0.125 or 1/8
67.
69.
71.a. 0.500; b . 0.250; c . 0.187
73.
75.
Additional P roblems
77.114 radian/s
79.3.72 mm
81.
83.a. 1.92. The g em is not a diamond (it is zirc on). b .
85.a. 0.898; b . We cannot ha ve , sinc e this w ould imply a sp eed gre ater than c. c. The refracte d angle
is to o big rela tive to the angle o f incidenc e.
87.
89.a. ; b. yes
Challenge P roblems
91.First part: . The remainder dep ends on the c omple xity o f the solution the re ader c onstructs .
93.proof; 1.33
95.a. 0.750; b . 0.563; c . 1.33561

Chap ter 2
Check Y our Under standing
Concep tual Ques tions
1.Virtual ima ge cannot b e projecte d on a screen . You c annot dis tinguish a re al ima ge from a vir tual ima ge
simply b y judging from the ima ge perceived with y our e ye.
3.Yes, you c an photograph a vir tual ima ge. For e xample , if y ou photograph y our reflection from a plane
mirror , you g et a photograph o f a vir tual ima ge. The c amera f ocuses the light tha t enters its lens to f orm an
ima ge; whether the sourc e of the light is a re al object or a reflection from mirror (i .e., a vir tual ima ge) do es
not ma tter.
5.No, you c an see the re al ima ge the same w ay you c an see the vir tual ima ge. The retina o f your e ye eff ectiv ely
serves as a screen .
7.The mirror should b e half y our siz e and its top e dge should b e at the lev el of your e yes. The siz e do es not
dep end on y our dis tanc e from the mirror .
9.when the object is a t infinity; see the mirror e qua tion
11.Yes, neg ative ma gnific ation simply me ans tha t the ima ge is upside do wn; this do es not prev ent the ima ge
from b eing larg er than the object . For ins tanc e, for a c oncave mirror , if dis tanc e to the object is larg er than
one f ocal dis tanc e but smaller than tw o focal dis tanc es the ima ge will b e inverted and ma gnifie d.
13.answers ma y vary
15.The f ocal length o f the lens is fix ed, so the ima ge dis tanc e chang es as a function o f object dis tanc e.
17.Yes, the f ocal length will chang e. The lens mak er’s equa tion sho ws tha t the f ocal length dep ends on the
inde x of refraction o f the me dium surrounding the lens . Bec ause the inde x of refraction o f water diff ers
from tha t of air , the f ocal length o f the lens will chang e when submerg ed in w ater.
19.A relax ed, normal-vision e ye will f ocus p arallel ra ys of light onto the retina.
21.A person with an internal lens will nee d glas ses to re ad b ecause their muscles c annot dis tort the lens as
they do with biologic al lenses , so the y cannot f ocus on ne ar objects . To correct ne arsighte dnes s, the p ower
of the intrao cular lens mus t be les s than tha t of the remo ved lens .
23.Microsc opes cre ate ima ges o f macrosc opic siz e, so g eometric optics applies .
25.The e yepiec e would b e mo ved slightly far ther from the objectiv e so tha t the ima ge forme d by the objectiv e
falls jus t beyond the f ocal length o f the e yepiec e.562
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Problems
27.
29.It is in the f ocal point o f the big mirror and a t the c enter o f cur vature o f the small mirror .
31.
33.
35.Step 1: Ima ge forma tion b y a mirror is in volved.
Step 2: Dra w the problem set up when p ossible .
Step 3: U se thin-lens e qua tions to solv e this problem .
Step 4: F ind f.
Step 5: Giv en: .
Step 6: N o ra y tracing is nee ded.
Step 7: U sing . Then , .
Step 8: The ima ge is vir tual b ecause the ima ge dis tanc e is neg ative. The f ocal length is p ositiv e, so the
mirror is c oncave.
37.a. for a c onvex mirror ; b. (behind the c orne a);
c.
39.
41.

43.
45.
47.
49.proof
51.a. ;
b. , so tha t
53.a. ;
b. , so the maximum height is ;
c. This seems quite re asona ble, sinc e at 3.00 m it is p ossible to g et a full length picture o f a p erson .
55.a. ;
b.
57.a. U sing , . Then w e can determine the ma gnific ation , . b.
and ; c. The ma gnific ation mincre ases rapidly as y ou incre ase the object
distanc e toward the f ocal length .
59.
61.
63.83 cm to the right o f the c onverging lens ,
65.
67.
69.a. ;
b. ;
c.
71.
73.Originally , the close vision w as 51.0 D . Theref ore,
75.originally , ; because the p ower for normal dis tant vision is 50.0 D , the p ower should b e
decre ased by 20.0 D
77.
79.a. ;
b.564
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

81.We nee d when , so
83.Let = far p oint
85.
87.
ll
89.
91.
93.
95.
97.a. ;
b.
99.a. behind the objectiv e lens;
b. ;
c.
in front o f the e yepiec e; d. ;
e.
101 .
103 .
105 .
107 .Ans wers will v ary.
109 .12 cm to the left o f the mirror ,
111 .27 cm in front o f the mirror , , orienta tion upright
113 .The f ollowing figure sho ws three suc cessive ima ges b eginning with the ima ge in mirror . is
the ima ge in mirror , whose ima ge in mirror is whose ima ge in mirror is the re al ima ge
.565

115 .5.4 cm from the axis
117 .Let the v ertex of the c oncave mirror b e the origin o f the c oordina te system . Ima ge 1 is a t −10/3 cm (−3.3
cm), ima ge 2 is a t −40/11 cm (−3.6 cm). These ser ve as objects f or subse quent ima ges, which are a t −310/
83 cm (−3.7 cm), −9340/2501 cm (−3.7 cm), −140,720/37,681 cm (−3.7 cm). A ll remaining ima ges are a t
appro xima tely −3.7 cm .
119 .
121 .
123 .−5 D
125 .11
Additional P roblems
127 .a.
b.566
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

c.
d. similar to the previous picture but with p oint Poutside the f ocal length; e . Repeat (a)–(d) f or a p oint
object o ff the axis . For a p oint object plac ed off axis in front o f a c oncave mirror c orresp onding to p arts
(a) and ( b), the c ase f or c onvex mirror left as e xercises .567

129 . , upright
131 .proof
133 .
Triangles BAOand are similar triangles . Thus , .Triangles NOF and are
similar triangles . Thus , . Noting tha t gives or .
Inverting this giv es Equa ting the tw o expres sions f or the ra tio gives .
Dividing through b y gives or .
135 .70 cm
137 .The plane mirror has an infinite f ocal point , so tha t . The total app arent dis tanc e of the man in568
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

the mirror will b e his actual dis tanc e, plus the app arent ima ge dis tanc e, or . If this
distanc e mus t be les s than 20 cm , he should s tand a t .
139 .Here w e want . If near p oint , . Thus ,
. Using gives , so the ne ar p oint is 29.7 cm .
141 .Assuming a lens a t 2.00 cm from the b oy’s eye, the ima ge dis tanc e mus t be
For an infinite -dis tanc e object , the re quire d power is
. Theref ore, the lens will c orrect the ne arsighte dnes s.
143 .
145 .Use, . The ima ge dis tanc e for the objectiv e is . Using
gives . We want this ima ge to b e at the f ocal
point o f the e yepiec e so tha t the e yepiec e forms an ima ge at infinity f or c omf ortable viewing . Thus , the
distanc edbetween the lenses should b e .
147 .a. focal length o f the c orrectiv e lens ; b. −1.25 D
149 .
151 .
Chap ter 3
Check Y our Under standing
3.1 , resp ectiv ely
3.2 a. 853 nm , 1097 nm; b . 731 nm , 975 nm
3.3 a. to o small; b . up to
Concep tual Ques tions
1.No. Tw o indep endent light sourc es do not ha ve coherent phase .
3.Because b oth the so dium lamps are not c oherent p airs o f light sourc es. Tw o lasers op erating indep endently
are also not c oherent so no inter ferenc e pattern results .
5.Mono chroma tic sourc es pro duce fring es a t angles ac cording to . With white light , each
constituent w avelength will pro duce fring es a t its o wn set o f angles , blending into the fring es o f adjac ent
wavelengths . This results in rainb ow patterns .
7.Differing p ath lengths result in diff erent phases a t des tina tion resulting in c onstructiv e or des tructiv e
inter ferenc e ac cordingly . Reflection c an c ause a phase chang e, which also a ffects ho w w aves inter fere.
Refraction into another me dium chang es the w avelength inside tha t me dium such tha t a w ave can emerg e
from the me dium with a diff erent phase c omp ared to another w ave tha t tra velled the same dis tanc e in a
different me dium .
9.Phase chang es o ccur up on reflection a t the top o f glas s cover and the top o f glas s slide only .
11.The sur face of the ham b eing mois t me ans there is a thin la yer o f fluid , resulting in thin-film inter ferenc e.
Because the e xact thicknes s of the film v aries acros s the piec e of ham , which is illumina ted by white light ,
different w avelengths pro duce bright fring es a t diff erent lo cations , resulting in rainb ow colors .
13.Other w avelengths will not g enerally sa tisfy for the same v alue o ftso reflections will result in
completely des tructiv e inter ferenc e. For an incidenc e angle , the p ath length inside the c oating will b e
incre ased by a factor so the new c ondition f or des tructiv e inter ferenc e becomes .
15.In one arm , plac e a transp arent chamb er to b e fille d with the g as. See Example 3.6 .
Problems
17.
19.
21.
23.62.5; sinc emmus t be an integ er, the highes t order is then .569

25.
27.a. ; b. ; c. 5.76, the highes t order is .
29.a. 2.37 cm; b . 1.78 cm
31.560 nm
33.1.2 mm
35.a. b.
37.1:9
39.532 nm ( green)
41.
43.620 nm (orang e)
45.380 nm
47.a. As suming nfor the plane is gre ater than 1.20, then there are tw o phase chang es: 0.833 cm . b. It is to o
thick , and the plane w ould b e too he avy. c. It is unre asona ble to think the la yer o f ma terial c ould b e an y
thicknes s when use d on a re al aircra ft.
49.
51.
Additional P roblems
53.
55.a. 4.26 cm; b . 2.84 cm
57.6
59.0.20 m
61.0.0839 mm
63.a. 9.8, 10.4, 11.7, and 15.7 cm; b . 3.9 cm
65.
67.700 nm
69.189 nm
71.a. green (504 nm); b . ma genta ( white minus green)
73.1.29
75. and
77.125 nm
79.413 nm and 689 nm
81.
83.47
85.
87.
Challenge P roblems
89.Bright and dark fring es switch plac es.
91.The p ath length mus t be les s than one -fourth o f the shor test visible w avelength in oil . The thicknes s of the
oil is half the p ath length , so it mus t be les s than one -eighth o f the shor test visible w avelength in oil . If w e
take 380 nm to b e the shor test visible w avelength in air , 33.9 nm .
93.
95.for one phase chang e: 950 nm (infrare d); f or three phase chang es: 317 nm (ultra violet); Theref ore, the oil
film will app ear black , sinc e the reflecte d light is not in the visible p art of the sp ectr um.
Chap ter 4
Check Y our Under standing
4.1 , , ; no
4.2 ,
4.3 From , the inter ferenc e maximum o ccurs a t for From Equa tion 4.1 , this is also570
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

the angle f or the sec ond diffraction minimum . (Note: Both e qua tions use the inde xmbut the y ref er to
separate phenomena.)
4.4 or 300 lines p er millimeter
4.5 , 3000 times bro ader than the Hubble T elesc ope
4.6 and ; Betw een , orders 1, 2, and 3, are all tha t exist.
Concep tual Ques tions
1.The diffraction p attern b ecomes wider .
3.Walkie -talkies use radio w aves whose w avelengths are c omp arable to the siz e of the hill and are thus a ble to
diffract around the hill . Visible w avelengths o f the flashlight tra vel as ra ys at this siz e sc ale.
5.The diffraction p attern b ecomes tw o-dimensional , with main fring es, which are no w sp ots, running in
perpendicular directions and fainter sp ots in interme diate directions .
7.The p arameter is the arc angle sho wn in the phasor dia gram in Figure 4.7 . The phase diff erenc e
between the firs t and las t Huy gens w avelet acros s the single slit is and is rela ted to the cur vature o f the
arc tha t forms the resultant phasor tha t determines the light intensity .
9.blue; The shor ter w avelength o f blue light results in a smaller angle f or diffraction limit .
11.No, these dis tanc es are three orders o f ma gnitude smaller than the w avelength o f visible light , so visible
light mak es a p oor prob e for a toms .
13.UV w avelengths are much larg er than la ttice sp acings in cr ystals such tha t there is no diffraction . The
Bragg e qua tion implies a v alue f orsinθgreater than unity , which has no solution .
15.Ima ge will app ear a t slightly diff erent lo cation and/or siz e when view ed using shor ter w avelength but
at exactly half the w avelength , a higher -order inter ferenc e rec onstructs the original ima ge, diff erent c olor .
Problems
17.a. ; b. no
19.a. ; b.
21.750 nm
23.2.4 mm , 4.7 mm
25.a. b. c.
27.1.92 m
29.
31.
33.
35.0.200
37.3
39.9
41.
43.
45.707 nm
47.a. , , , ; b. , , , ; c. Decre asing the numb er o f lines p er centimeter
by a factor o fxmeans tha t the angle f or the x-order maximum is the same as the original angle f or the
first-order maximum .
49.a. using b. using
51.a. 26,300 lines /cm; b . yes; c . no
53.
55.107 m
57.a. b. 23.2 m; c . 590 km
59.a. b. 5.81 km; c . 0.179 mm; d . can resolv e details 0.2 mm ap art at arm ’s length
61.
63.6.0 cm
65.7.71 km
67.1.0 m571

69.1.2 cm or closer
71.no
73.0.120 nm
75.
77.
Additional P roblems
79.a. 2.2 mm; b . , sec ond-order y ellow and third-order violet c oincide
81.2.2 km
83.1.3 cm
85.a. 0.28 mm; b . 0.28 m; c . 280 m; d . 113 km
87.33 m
89.a. vertically; b . , ; c. 0, , ; d. 89 cm; e . 71 cm
91.0.98 cm
93.
95.340 nm
97.a. 0.082 rad and 0.087 rad; b . 480 nm and 660 nm
99.two orders
101 .yes and N /A
103 .600 nm
105 .a. ; b.
107 .0.63 m
109 .1
111 .0.17 for only , no higher orders
113 .
115 .a. 42.3 nm; b . This w avelength is not in the visible sp ectr um. c. The numb er o f slits in this diffraction
grating is to o larg e. Etching in integra ted circuits c an b e done to a resolution o f 50 nm , so slit sep arations
of 400 nm are a t the limit o f wha t we can do to day. This line sp acing is to o small to pro duce diffraction o f
light .
117 .a. 549 km; b . This is an unre asona bly larg e telesc ope. c. Unre asona ble to as sume diffraction limit f or
optic al telesc opes unles s in sp ace due to a tmospheric eff ects .
Challenge P roblems
119 .a. ; b.
121 .12,800
123 .
Chap ter 5
Check Y our Under standing
5.1 Special rela tivity applies only to objects mo ving a t constant v elocity, where as g eneral rela tivity applies to
objects tha t underg o ac celera tion .
5.2
5.3 a.
5.3 b. Only the rela tive sp eed of the tw o sp acecra ft ma tters b ecause there is no a bsolute motion through
space. The signal is emit ted from a fix ed location in the frame o f ref erenc e ofA, so the prop er time inter val
of its emis sion is The dura tion o f the signal me asure d from frame o f ref erenc eBis then572
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

5.4
5.5 Star t with the definition o f the prop er time increment:
where ( dx,dy,dx,cdt) are me asure d in the iner tial frame o f an obser ver who do es not nec essarily see tha t
particle a t res t. This theref ore b ecomes
5.6 Although displac ements p erpendicular to the rela tive motion are the same in b oth frames o f ref erenc e,
the time inter val between ev ents diff er, and diff erenc es in dtand lead to diff erent v elocities seen from
the tw o frames .
5.7 We can subs titute the da ta directly into the e qua tion f or rela tivis tic Doppler fre quency:
5.8 Subs titute the da ta into the giv en e qua tion:
5.9
Concep tual Ques tions
1.the sec ond p ostula te, involving the sp eed of light; clas sical ph ysics alre ady include d the ide a tha t the la ws
of mechanics , at least, were the same in all iner tial frames , but the v elocity o f a light pulse w as diff erent in
different frames mo ving with resp ect to e ach other
3.yes, pro vide d the plane is flying a t constant v elocity rela tive to the Ear th; in tha t case, an object with no
force acting on it within the plane has no chang e in v elocity rela tive to the plane and no chang e in v elocity
rela tive to the Ear th; b oth the plane and the ground are iner tial frames f or describing the motion o f the
object
5.The obser ver mo ving with the pro cess sees its inter val of prop er time , which is the shor test seen b y an y
obser ver.
7.The length o f an object is gre atest to an obser ver who is mo ving with the object , and theref ore me asures its
prop er length .
9.a. N o, not within the as trona ut’s own frame o f ref erenc e. b. He sees Ear th clo cks to b e in their res t frame
moving b y him , and theref ore sees them slo wed. c. No, not within the as trona ut’s own frame o f ref erenc e. d.
Yes, he me asures the dis tanc e between the tw o stars to b e shor ter. e. The tw o obser vers a gree on their573

rela tive sp eed.
11.There is no me asure d chang e in w avelength or fre quency in this c ase. The rela tivis tic Doppler eff ect
dep ends only on the rela tive velocity o f the sourc e and the obser ver, not an y sp eed rela tive to a me dium
for the light w aves.
13.It sho ws tha t the s tars are g etting more dis tant from Ear th, tha t the univ erse is e xpanding , and doing so a t
an ac celera ting ra te, with gre ater v elocity f or more dis tant s tars .]
15.Yes. This c an happ en if the e xternal f orce is b alanc ed by other e xternally applie d forces, so tha t the net
external f orce is z ero.
17.Because it loses thermal energ y, which is the kinetic energ y of the random motion o f its c onstituent
particles , its mas s decre ases b y an e xtremely small amount , as describ ed by energ y-mas s equiv alenc e.
19.Yes, in principle there w ould b e a similar eff ect on mas s for an y decre ase in energ y, but the chang e would
be so small f or the energ y chang es in a chemic al re action tha t it w ould b e undetecta ble in practic e.
21.Not ac cording to sp ecial rela tivity . Nothing with mas s can a ttain the sp eed of light .
Problems
23.a. 1.0328; b . 1.15
25.
27.0.800 c
29.0.140 c
31.48.6 m
33.Using the v alues giv en in Example 5.3 : a. 0.627 km; b . 2.00 km; c . 2.00 km
35.a. 10.0 c; b. The resulting sp eed of the c anis ter is gre ater than c , an imp ossibility . c. It is unre asona ble to
assume tha t the c anis ter will mo ve toward the e arth a t 1.20 c.
37.The angle αappro aches and the and rota te to ward the e dge of the light c one.
39.15 m/s e ast
41.32 m/s
43.a. The sec ond b all appro aches with v elocity − vand c omes to res t while the other b all c ontinues with
velocity − v; b. This c onser ves momentum .
45.a. b.
47.0.615 c
49.0.696 c
51.(Proof)
53.
55.a. b. 1.000000005
57.
59.0.512 Me V ac cording to the numb er o f signific ant figures s tated. The e xact v alue is closer to 0.511 Me V.
61. to tw o digits b ecause the diff erenc e in res t mas s energies is f ound to tw o digits
63.a. b.
65.a. b. c. is gre ater f or h ydrog en
67.a. 208; b . 0.999988 c; six digits use d to sho w diff erenc e from c
69.a. b. 1.54
71.a. 0.914 c; b. The res t mas s energ y of an electron is 0.511 Me V, so the kinetic energ y is appro xima tely
150% o f the res t mas s energ y. The electron should b e tra veling close to the sp eed of light .
Additional P roblems
73.a. 0.866 c; b. 0.995 c
75.a. 4.303 y to f our digits to sho w an y eff ect; b . 0.1434 y; c .
77.a. 4.00; b .
79.a. A sends a radio pulse a t each he artbeat to B , who kno ws their rela tive velocity and uses the time dila tion574
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

formula to c alcula te the prop er time inter val between he artbeats from the obser ved signal . b.
81.a. firs t photon: at second photon:
b. simultaneous in A , not simultaneous in B
83.
85.
sinc e we can ignore the term and find
The bre akdown o f Newtonian simultaneity is negligibly small , but not e xactly z ero, at realistic train
speeds o f 50 m/s .
87.
89.Note tha t all ans wers to this problem are rep orted to fiv e signific ant figures , to dis tinguish the results . a.
0.99947 c; b. c.
91.a. –0.400 c; b. –0.909 c
93.a. 1.65 km/s; b . Yes, if the sp eed of light w ere this small , speeds tha t we can achiev e in ev eryday life would
be larg er than 1% o f the sp eed of light and w e could obser ve rela tivis tic eff ects much more o ften .
95.775 MHz
97.a. b. The small sp eed tells us tha t the mas s of a protein is subs tantially smaller than tha t
of even a tin y amount o f macrosc opic ma tter.
99.a.575

b.
101 .90.0 Me V
103 .a. b. yes
105 .
107 .a. b. theref ore,
109 .a. 0.314 c; b. 0.99995 c(Five digits use d to sho w diff erenc e from c)
111 .a. 1.00 k g; b. This much mas s would b e me asura ble, but prob ably not obser vable jus t by looking b ecause
it is 0.01% o f the total mas s.
113 .a. b. c. d. 0.32%
Chap ter 6
Check Y our Under standing
6.1 Bunsen ’s burner
6.2 The w avelength o f the radia tion maximum decre ases with incre asing temp erature .
6.3 so the s tar is hot ter.
6.4
6.5 No, because then
6.6 V; 1040 nm
6.7
6.8 at a angle;
6.9 121.5 nm and 91.1 nm; no , these sp ectral b ands are in the ultra violet
6.10 ℏ
6.11 29 pm
6.12
6.13
6.14
6.15 doubles it
Concep tual Ques tions
1.yellow
3.goes from re d to violet through the rainb ow of colors
5.would not diff er
7.human e ye do es not see IR radia tion
9.No
11.from the slop e
13.Ans wers ma y vary
15.the p article character
17.Ans wers ma y vary
19.no; y es
21.no
23.right angle
25.no
27.The y are a t ground s tate.576
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

29.Ans wers ma y vary
31.incre ase
33.for larg ern
35.Yes, the e xcess of 13.6 e V will b ecome kinetic energ y of a free electron .
37.no
39.X-rays, best resolving p ower
41.proton
43.negligibly small de Broglie ’s wavelengths
45.to avoid c ollisions with air molecules
47.Ans wers ma y vary
49.Ans wers ma y vary
51.yes
53.yes
Problems
55.a. 0.81 e V; b. c. 2 min 20 sec
57.a. 7245 K; b . 3.62 μ m
59.about 3 K
61. Hz; 0.620 Å
63.263 nm; no
65.3.68 e V
67.4.09 e V
69.5.60 e V
71.a. 1.89 e V; b. 459 THz; c . 1.21 V
73.264 nm; UV
75.
77.
79.56.21 e V
81. 124 k eV
83.82.9 fm; 15 Me V
85.(Proof)
87.
89.121.5 nm
91.a. 0.661 e V; b. –10.2 e V; c. 1.511 e V
93.3038 THz
95.97.33 nm
97.a. h/ b. 3.4 e V; c. – 6.8 e V; d. – 3.4 e V
99.
101 .365 nm; UV
103 .no
105 .7
107 .145.5 pm
109 .20 fm; 9 fm
111 .a. 2.103 e V; b. 0.846 nm
113 .80.9 pm
115 .
117 .
119 . 0.00124 fm
121 .24.11 V
123 .a. b. c. 74.91 m/s
125 .577

Additional P roblems
127 .
129 .1.034 e V
131 .
133 .387.8 nm
135 .a. b. 0.533 m W
137 .a. b. 0.533 m W; c. 0.644 mA; d . 2.57 ns
139 .a. 0.132 pm; b . 9.39 Me V; c. 0.047 Me V
141 .a. 2 k J; b. c. d. yes
143 .a. 0.003 nm; b .
145 .
147 .a. b. c.
149 .a. 36; b . 18.2 nm; c . UV
151 .396 nm; 5.23 ne V
153 .7.3 k eV
155 .728 m/s;
157 .
159 .
161 .(Proof)
163 .
Chap ter 7
Check Y our Under standing
7.1
7.2
7.3
7.4 ;
7.5
7.6 None. The firs t function has a disc ontinuity; the sec ond function is double -value d; and the third function
diverges so is not normaliza ble.
7.7 a. 9.1%; b . 25%
7.8 a. 295 N /m; b . 0.277 e V
7.9
7.10
Concep tual Ques tions
1. where ; 1/L, where
3.The w ave function do es not c orresp ond directly to an y me asure d quantity . It is a to ol for pre dicting the
values o f ph ysical quantities .
5.The a verage value o f the ph ysical quantity f or a larg e numb er o f particles with the same w ave function .
7.Yes, if its p osition is c ompletely unkno wn. Yes, if its momentum is c ompletely unkno wn.
9.No. According to the unc ertainty principle , if the unc ertainty on the p article ’s position is small , the
unc ertainty on its momentum is larg e. Similarly , if the unc ertainty on the p article ’s position is larg e, the
unc ertainty on its momentum is small .
11.No, it me ans tha t pre dictions a bout the p article (e xpres sed in terms o f prob abilities) are time -
indep endent .
13.No, because the prob ability o f the p article e xisting in a narro w (infinitesimally small) inter val at the
disc ontinuity is undefine d.
15.No. For an infinite square w ell, the sp acing b etween energ y lev els incre ases with the quantum numb ern.
The smalles tenerg y me asure d corresp onds to the transition from n= 2 to 1, which is three times the578
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

ground s tate energ y. The larg estenerg ymeasure d corresp onds to a transition from ∞to 1, which is
infinity . (Note: E ven p articles with e xtremely larg e energies remain b ound to an infinite square w ell—the y
can nev er “escape”)
17.No. This energ y corresp onds to , but nmus t be an integ er.
19.Because the smalles t allo wed value o f the quantum numb ernfor a simple harmonic oscilla tor is 0. N o,
because quantum mechanics and clas sical mechanics a gree only in the limit o f larg e.
21.Yes, within the c onstraints o f the unc ertainty principle . If the oscilla ting p article is lo calized, the
momentum and theref ore energ y of the oscilla tor are dis tribute d.
23.doubling the b arrier width
25.No, the res toring f orce on the p article a t the w alls o f an infinite square w ell is infinity .
Problems
27.
29.(a) and (e), c an b e normaliz ed
31.a. ; b. ; c. ; d. ; e. ℏ
33.a. ; b. ; c.
35.
37.a. ; b.
39.Carrying out the deriv atives yields
41.Carrying out the deriv atives (as a bove) for the sine function giv es a c osine on the right side the e qua tion ,
so the e quality fails . The same o ccurs f or the c osine solution .
43. ℏ
45.ℏ ; The p article has definite momentum and theref ore definite momentum square d.
47.9.4 e V, 64%
49.0.38 nm
51.1.82 Me V
53.24.7 nm
55.
57.a.
;
b.
59.proof
61.
63.579

65. ℏ ; ℏ
67.proof
69.A comple x function o f the f orm , , satisfies Schrӧding er’s time -indep endent e qua tion . The op erators
for kinetic and total energ y are line ar, so an y line ar combina tion o f such w ave functions is also a v alid
solution to Schrӧding er’s equa tion . Theref ore, we conclude tha tEqua tion 7.68 satisfies Equa tion 7.61 , and
Equa tion 7.69 satisfies Equa tion 7.63 .
71.a. 4.21%; b . 0.84%; c . 0.06%
73.a. 0.13%; b . close to 0%
75.0.38 nm
Additional P roblems
77.proof
79.a. 4.0 %; b . 1.4 %; c . 4.0%; d . 1.4%
81.a. ; b.
83.proof
85.1.2 N /m
87.0
Challenge P roblems
89.
91.3.92%
93.proof
Chap ter 8
Check Y our Under standing
8.1 No. The quantum numb er Thus , the ma gnitude o f is alw ays les s than L
because
8.2
8.3 frequency quadr uples
Concep tual Ques tions
1.n(princip al quantum numb er) total energ y
(orbital angular quantum numb er) total a bsolute ma gnitude o f the orbital angular momentum m
(orbital angular projection quantum numb er) z-comp onent o f the orbital angular momentum
3.The Bohr mo del describ es the electron as a p article tha t mo ves around the proton in w ell-define d orbits .
Schrö ding er’s mo del describ es the electron as a w ave, and kno wledge about the p osition o f the electron is
restricte d to prob ability s tatements . The total energ y of the electron in the ground s tate (and all e xcited
states) is the same f or b oth mo dels . Ho wever, the orbital angular momentum o f the ground s tate is diff erent
for these mo dels . In Bohr ’s mo del, , and in Schrö ding er’s mo del, .
5.a, c, d; The total energ y is chang ed (Z eeman split ting ). The w ork done on the h ydrog en a tom rota tes the
atom , so the z-comp onent o f angular momentum and p olar angle are a ffecte d. Ho wever, the angular
momentum is not a ffecte d.
7.Even in the ground s tate ( ), a h ydrog en a tom has ma gnetic prop erties due the intrinsic (internal)
electron spin . The ma gnetic moment o f an electron is prop ortional to its spin .
9.For all electrons , and As w e will see , not all p articles ha ve the same spin quantum numb er.
For e xample , a photon as a spin 1 ( ), and a Higgs b oson has spin 0 ( ).
11.An electron has a ma gnetic moment as sociated with its intrinsic (internal) spin . Spin-orbit c oupling
occurs when this interacts with the ma gnetic field pro duced by the orbital angular momentum o f the
electron .580
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

13.Elements tha t belong in the same c olumn in the p erio dic ta ble o f elements ha ve the same fillings o f their
outer shells , and theref ore the same numb er o f valenc e electrons . For e xample:
Li: (one v alenc e electron in the shell)
Na: (one v alenc e electron in the shell)
Both , Li and N a belong to firs t column .
15.Atomic and molecular sp ectra are said to b e “discrete ,” because only c ertain sp ectral lines are obser ved.
In contras t, spectra from a white light sourc e (consis ting o f man y photon fre quencies) are c ontinuous
because a c ontinuous “rainb ow” of colors is obser ved.
17.UV light c onsis ts of rela tively high fre quency (shor t wavelength) photons . So the energ y of the a bsorb ed
photon and the energ y transition ( ) in the a tom is rela tively larg e. In c omp arison , visible light c onsis ts
of rela tively lo wer-frequency photons . Theref ore, the energ y transition in the a tom and the energ y of the
emit ted photon is rela tively small .
19.For macrosc opic s ystems , the quantum numb ers are v ery larg e, so the energ y diff erenc e ( ) between
adjac ent energ y lev els (orbits) is v ery small . The energ y rele ased in transitions b etween these closely
space energ y lev els is much to o small to b e detecte d.
21.Laser light relies on the pro cess of stimula ted emis sion . In this pro cess, electrons mus t be prep ared in an
excited (upp er) metas table s tate such tha t the p assage of light through the s ystem pro duces de -excitations
and , theref ore, additional light .
23.A Blu-Ra y pla yer uses blue laser light to prob e the bumps and pits o f the disc and a CD pla yer uses re d
laser light . The rela tively shor t-wavelength blue light is nec essary to prob e the smaller pits and bumps on
a Blu-ra y disc; smaller pits and bumps c orresp ond to higher s tora ge densities .
Problems
25.
27. are p ossible
29.18
31.
33.(1, 1, 1)
35.For the orbital angular momentum quantum numb er,l, the allo wed values o f:
.
With the e xception o f , the total numb er is jus t 2lbecause the numb er o f states on either side o f
is jus tl. Including , the total numb er o f orbital angular momentum s tates f or the orbital
angular momentum quantum numb er,l, is: Later, when w e consider electron spin , the total
numb er o f angular momentum s tates will b e found to twic e this v alue b ecause e ach orbital angular
momentum s tates is as sociated with tw o states o f electron spin: spin up and spin do wn).
37.The prob ability tha t the 1 selectron o f a h ydrog en a tom is f ound outside o f the Bohr radius is
∞
39.For , (1 state), and (3 states). The total is 4.
41.The 3 pstate corresp onds to , . Theref ore,
43.The ra tio o f their mas ses is 1/207, so the ra tio o f their ma gnetic moments is 207. The electron ’s ma gnetic
moment is more than 200 times larg er than the muon .
45.a. The 3 dstate corresp onds to , . So,
b. The maximum torque o ccurs when the ma gnetic moment and e xternal ma gnetic field v ectors are a t
right angles ( . In this c ase:
47.A 3pelectron is in the s tate and . The minimum torque ma gnitude o ccurs when the ma gnetic
moment and e xternal ma gnetic field v ectors are mos t parallel (antip arallel). This o ccurs when
.The torque ma gnitude is giv en b y581

Where
For we ha ve:
49.An infinitesimal w ork dW done b y a ma gnetic torque to rota te the ma gnetic moment through an angle
:
,
where . Work done is interprete d as a drop in p otential energ yU, so
The total energ y chang e is determine d by summing o ver infinitesimal chang es in the p otential energ y:
51.Spin up (rela tive to p ositiv ez-axis):
Spin do wn (rela tive to p ositiv ez-axis):
53.The spin projection quantum numb er is , so the z-comp onent o f the ma gnetic moment is
The p otential energ y as sociated with the interaction b etween the electron and the e xternal ma gnetic field
is
The energ y diff erenc e between these s tates is , so the w avelength o f light pro duced is
55.It is incre ased by a factor o f 2.
57.a. 32; b .
59.a. and e . are allo wed; the others are not allo wed.
b. not allo wed for
c. Cannot ha ve three electrons in ssubshell b ecause
d. Cannot ha ve sev en electrons in psubshell (max o f 6)
61.
63.a. The minimum v alue o fis to ha ve nine electrons in it .
b.
65.
67.For , one electron “ orbits” a nucleus with tw o protons and tw o neutrons ( ). Ioniza tion energ y
refers to the energ y re quire d to remo ve the electron from the a tom . The energ y nee ded to remo ve the
electron in the ground s tate of ion to infinity is neg ative the v alue o f the ground s tate energ y, writ ten:
Thus , the energ y to ioniz e the electron is
Similarly , the energ y nee ded to remo ve an electron in the firs t excited state of ion to infinity is
negative the v alue o f the firs t excited state energ y, writ ten:
The energ y to ioniz e the electron is 30.6 e V.582
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

69.The w avelength o f the laser is giv en b y:
where is the energ y of the photon and is the ma gnitude o f the energ y diff erenc e. Solving f or the
latter, we get:
The neg ative sign indic ates tha t the electron los t energ y in the transition .
71.
73.According to the c onser vation o f the energ y, the p otential energ y of the electron is c onverted completely
into kinetic energ y. The initial kinetic energ y of the electron is z ero (the electron b egins a t res t). So , the
kinetic energ y of the electron jus t before it s trikes the targ et is:
Ifallof this energ y is c onverted into braking radia tion , the fre quency o f the emit ted radia tion is a
maximum , theref ore:
When the emit ted fre quency is a maximum , then the emit ted wavelength is a minimum , so:
75.A muon is 200 times he avier than an electron , but the minimum w avelength do es not dep end on mas s, so
the result is unchang ed.
77.
79.72.5 k eV
81.The a tomic numb ers f or Cu and A u are and 79, resp ectiv ely. The X -ray photon fre quency f or g old
is gre ater than c opp er b y a factor:
Theref ore, the X -ray wavelength o f Au is a bout eight times shor ter than f or c opp er.
83.a. If flesh has the same density as w ater, then w e use d photons . b. 2.52 MW
Additional P roblems
85.The smalles t angle c orresp onds to and . Theref ore
87.a. According to Equa tion 8.1 , when , ∞, and when ∞ b. The f ormer result
sugg ests tha t the electron c an ha ve an infinite neg ative potential energ y. The quantum mo del o f the
hydrog en a tom a voids this p ossibility b ecause the prob ability density a t is zero.
89.A formal solution using sums is somewha t complic ated. Ho wever, the ans wer e asily f ound b y studying the
mathema tical pattern b etween the princip al quantum numb er and the total numb er o f orbital angular
momentum s tates.
For , the total numb er o f orbital angular momentum s tates is 1; f or , the total numb er is 4; and ,
when , the total numb er is 9, and so on . The p attern sugg ests the total numb er o f orbital angular
momentum s tates f or the nth shell is .
(Later, when w e consider electron spin , the total numb er o f angular momentum s tates will b e found to b e
, because e ach orbital angular momentum s tates is as sociated with tw o states o f electron spin; spin up
and spin do wn).
91.50
93.The maximum numb er o f orbital angular momentum electron s tates in the nth shell o f an a tom is .
Each o f these s tates c an b e fille d by a spin up and spin do wn electron . So, the maximum numb er o f
electron s tates in the nth shell is .
95.a., c ., and e . are allo wed; the others are not allo wed. b. is not allo wed.
d.
97.
99.The a tomic numb ers f or Cu and Ag are and 47, resp ectiv ely. The X -ray photon fre quency f or silv er
is gre ater than c opp er b y the f ollowing factor:583

Theref ore, the X -ray wavelength o f Ag is a bout three times shor ter than f or c opp er.
101 .a. 3.24; b .is not an integ er. c. The w avelength mus t not b e correct . Bec ause the as sumption
that the line w as from the Balmer series is p ossible , but the w avelength o f the light did not pro duce an
integ er value f or . If the w avelength is c orrect , then the as sumption tha t the g as is h ydrog en is not
correct; it might b e so dium ins tead.
Chap ter 9
Check Y our Under standing
9.1 It corresp onds to a repulsiv e force between c ore electrons in the ions .
9.2 the moment o f iner tia
9.3 more difficult
9.4 It decre ases .
9.5 The f orward bias current is much larg er. To a g ood appro xima tion , dio des p ermit current flo w in only one
direction .
9.6 a low temp erature and lo w ma gnetic field
Concep tual Ques tions
1.An ionic b ond is f orme d by the a ttraction o f a p ositiv e and neg ative ion . A c ovalent b ond is f orme d by the
sharing o f one or more electrons b etween a toms . A v an der W aals b ond is f orme d by the a ttraction o f two
electric ally p olariz ed molecules .
3.1. An electron is remo ved from one a tom . The resulting a tom is a p ositiv e ion . 2. An electron is a bsorb ed
from another a tom . The result a tom is a neg ative ion . 3. The p ositiv e and neg ative ions are a ttracte d
together until an e quilibrium sep aration is re ache d.
5.Bonding is as sociated with a sp atial function tha t is s ymmetric under e xchang e of the tw o electrons . In this
state, the electron density is larg est between the a toms . The total function mus t be antis ymmetric (sinc e
electrons are f ermions), so the spin function mus t be antis ymmetric . In this s tate, the spins o f the electrons
are antip arallel .
7.rota tional energ y, vibra tional energ y, and a tomic energ y
9.Each ion is in the field o f multiple ions o f the other opp osite charg e.
11.6, 6
13.0.399 nm
15.incre ases b y a factor o f
17.For larg er energies , the numb er o f accessible s tates incre ases .
19.(1) Solv e Schrö ding er’s equa tion f or the allo wed states and energies . (2) Determine energ y lev els f or the
case o f a v ery larg e lattice sp acing and then determine the energ y lev els as this sp acing is re duced.
21.ForNatoms sp aced far ap art, there are Ndifferent w ave functions , all with the same energ y (similar to the
case o f an electron in the double w ell o f As the a toms are pushe d tog ether , the energies o f these N
different w ave functions are split . By the e xclusion principle , each electron mus t each ha ve a unique set o f
quantum numb ers, so the Natoms bringing Nelectrons tog ether mus t ha ve at leastNstates.
23.For a semic onductor , there is a rela tively larg e energ y gap b etween the lo west completely fille d band and
the ne xt available unfille d band . Typic ally, a numb er o f electrons tra verse the g ap and theref ore the
electric al conductivity is small . The prop erties o f a semic onductor are sensitivity to temp erature: As the
temp erature is incre ased, thermal e xcitations promote charg e carriers from the v alenc e band acros s the
gap and into the c onduction b and .
25.a. Germanium has f our v alenc e electrons . If g ermanium dop ed with arsenic (five valenc e electrons), f our
are use d in b onding and one electron will b e left f or c onduction . This pro duces an n-typ e ma terial . b. If
germanium is dop ed with gallium (three v alenc e electrons), all three electrons are use d in b onding ,
leaving one hole f or c onduction . This results in a p-typ e ma terial .
27.The Hall eff ect is the pro duction o f a p otential diff erenc e due to motion o f a c onductor through an e xternal584
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

magnetic field . This eff ect c an b e use d to determine the drift v elocity o f the charg e carriers (electrons or
hole). If the current density is me asure d, this eff ect c an also determine the numb er o f charg e carriers p er
unit v olume .
29.It pro duces new unfille d energ y lev els jus t above the fille d valenc e band . These lev els ac cept electrons
from the v alenc e band .
31.The electric field pro duced by the unc overed ions re duces fur ther diffusion . In e quilibrium , the diffusion
and drift currents c ancel so the net current is z ero. Theref ore, the resis tanc e of the depletion region is
larg e.
33.The p ositiv e terminal is applie d to the n-side , which unc overs more ions ne ar the junction ( widens the
depletion la yer), incre ases the junction v olta ge diff erenc e, and theref ore re duces the diffusion o f holes
acros s the junction .
35.Sound mo ves a diaphra gm in and out , which v aries the input or b ase current o f the transis tor circuit . The
transis tor amplifies this signal ( p-n-p semic onductor). The output or c ollector current driv es a sp eaker.
37.BSC theor y explains sup erconductivity in terms o f the interactions b etween electron p airs (C ooper p airs).
One electron in a p air interacts with the la ttice, which interacts with the sec ond electron . The c ombine
electron-la ttice-electron interaction binds the electron p air tog ether in a w ay tha t overcomes their mutual
repulsion .
39.As the ma gnitude o f the ma gnetic field is incre ased, the critic al temp erature decre ases .
Problems
41.
43.
45.The me asure d value is 0.484 nm , and the actual v alue is close to 0.127 nm . The la boratory results are the
same order o f ma gnitude , but a factor 4 high .
47.0.110 nm
49.a. ; b.
51.0.65 nm
53.
55.2196 k cal
57.11.5
59.a. ; b. ; for v ery larg e values o f the quantum numb ers, the sp acing b etween adjac ent
energ y lev els is v ery small (“in the c ontinuum ”). This is c onsis tent with the e xpecta tion tha t for larg e
quantum numb ers, quantum and clas sical mechanics giv e appro xima tely the same pre dictions .
61.10.0 e V
63.
65.Fermi energ y, Temp erature ,
67.For an insula tor, the energ y gap b etween the v alenc e band and the c onduction b and is larg er than f or a
semic onductor .
69.4.13 k eV
71.
73.5 T
75.
77.
79.
81.61 k V
Additional P roblems
83.
85.
87. ; (no rota tion);
;585

89.i.The y are fairly hard and s table.
ii.The y vaporiz e at rela tively high temp eratures (1000 to 2000 K ).
iii.The y are transp arent to visible radia tion , because photons in the visible p ortion o f the sp ectr um are
not energ etic enough to e xcite an electron from its ground s tate to an e xcited state.
iv.The y are p oor electric al conductors b ecause the y contain eff ectiv ely no free electrons .
v.The y are usually soluble in w ater, because the w ater molecule has a larg e dip ole moment whose
electric field is s trong enough to bre ak the electros tatic b onds b etween the ions .
91.No, He a toms do not c ontain v alenc e electrons tha t can b e share d in the f orma tion o f a chemic al bond .
93. so
95.An impurity b and will b e forme d when the density o f the donor a toms is high enough tha t the orbits o f the
extra electrons o verlap . We sa w earlier tha t the orbital radius is a bout 50 Angs troms , so the maximum
distanc e between the impurities f or a b and to f orm is 100 Angs troms . Thus if w e use 1 Angs trom as the
intera tomic dis tanc e between the Si a toms , we find tha t 1 out o f 100 a toms along a line ar chain mus t be a
donor a tom . And in a three -dimensional cr ystal, roughly 1 out o f atoms mus t be replac ed by a donor
atom in order f or an impurity b and to f orm .
97.a. ; b. ; c.
99.
Challenge P roblems
101 .In three dimensions , the energ y of an electron is giv en b y:
where . Each allo wed energ y state corresp onds to no de in Nspace
. The numb er o f particles c orresp onds to the numb er o f states (no des) in the firs t octant ,
within a sphere o f radius ,R. This numb er is giv en b y: where the factor 2 ac counts
for tw o states o f spin . The density o f states is f ound b y diff erentia ting this e xpres sion b y energ y:
. Integra ting giv es:
Chap ter 10
Check Y our Under standing
10.1 eight
10.2 harder
10.3 Half -life is in versely rela ted to dec ay ra te, so the half -life is shor t. Activity dep ends on b oth the numb er o f
decaying p articles and the dec ay ra te, so the activity c an b e gre at or small .
10.4 Neither; it s tays the same .
10.5 the same
10.6 the c onversion o f mas s to energ y
10.7 power
Concep tual Ques tions
1.The nucleus o f an a tom is made o f one or more nucleons . A nucleon ref ers to either a proton or neutron . A
nuclide is a s table nucleus .
3.A bound s ystem should ha ve les s mas s than its c omp onents b ecause o f energ y-mas s equiv alenc e
If the energ y of a s ystem is re duced, the total mas s of the s ystem is re duced. If tw o bricks are
plac ed ne xt to one another , the a ttraction b etween them is purely gra vitational , assuming the bricks are
electric ally neutral . The gra vitational f orce between the bricks is rela tively small (c omp ared to the s trong
nucle ar force), so the mas s def ect is much to o small to b e obser ved. If the bricks are glue d tog ether with
cement , the mas s def ect is lik ewise small b ecause the electric al interactions b etween the electrons in volved
in the b onding are s till rela tively small .
5.Nucleons a t the sur face of a nucleus interact with f ewer nucleons . This re duces the binding energ y per
nucleon , which is b ased on an a verage over all the nucleons in the nucleus .586
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

7.Tha t it is c onstant .
9.Gamma ( γ) rays are pro duced by nucle ar interactions and X -rays and light are pro duced by atomic
interactions . Gamma ra ys are typic ally shor ter w avelength than X -rays, and X -rays are shor ter w avelength
than light .
11.Assume a rectangular c oordina te system with an xy-plane tha t corresp onds to the plane o f the p aper.
bends into the p age (trajector y parabolic in the xz-plane); bends into the p age (trajector y parabolic in
the xz-plane); and is unb ent.
13.Yes. An a tomic b omb is a fis sion b omb , and a fis sion b omb o ccurs b y split ting the nucleus of atom .
15.Shor t-rang e forces b etween nucleons in a nucleus are analog ous to the f orces b etween w ater molecules in
a water droplet . In p articular , the f orces b etween nucleons a t the sur face of the nucleus pro duce a sur face
tension similar to tha t of a w ater droplet .
17.The nuclei pro duced in the fusion pro cess ha ve a larg er binding energ y per nucleon than the nuclei tha t
are fuse d. Tha t is, nucle ar fusion decre ases a verage energ y of the nucleons in the s ystem . The energ y
differenc e is c arrie d away as radia tion .
19.Alpha p articles do not p enetra te ma terials such as skin and clothes e asily . (Recall tha t alpha radia tion is
barely a ble to p ass through a thin sheet o f paper.) Ho wever, when pro duce inside the b ody, neighb oring
cells are vulnera ble.
Problems
21.Use the r ule
Atomic Number ( Z)Neutr on Number ( N)Mass Number ( A)
(a) 29 29 58
(b) 11 13 24
(c) 84 126 210
(d) 20 25 45
(e) 82 124 206
23.a. ;
b.
25.side length
27.92.4 Me V
29.
31.a. 7.570 Me V; b.
33.The dec ay constant is e qual to the neg ative value o f the slop e or The half -life of the nuclei , and
thus the ma terial , is
35.a. The dec ay constant is . b. Sinc e strontium-91 has an a tomic mas s of 90.90 g , the
numb er o f nuclei in a 1.00- g sample is initially
The initial activity f or strontium-91 is
The activity a t is
37. ; ;
39.a. 0.988 Ci; b . The half -life of is more precisely kno wn than it w as when the Ci unit w as es tablishe d.587

41.a. ; b.
43.a. ; b.
45.a. 4.273 Me V; b. ; c. Sinc e is a slo wly dec aying subs tanc e, only a v ery small numb er o f
nuclei dec ay on human timesc ales; theref ore, although those nuclei tha t dec ay lose a notic eable fraction o f
their mas s, the chang e in the total mas s of the sample is not detecta ble f or a macrosc opic sample .
47.a. ; b. 0.546 Me V
49.
51.a. ; b. 0.862 Me V
53.a. ; b. 33.05 Me V
55.a. 177.1 Me V; b. This v alue is appro xima tely e qual to the a verage BEN f or he avy nuclei . c.
57.a. ; b. ; c. 991 k g
59.i. ;
ii. ;
iii.
61.26.73 Me V
63.a. ; b. ;
This hug e numb er is indic ative of ho w rarely a neutrino interacts , sinc e larg e detectors obser ve very few
per da y.
65.a. The a tomic mas s of deuterium ( ) is 2.014102 u , while tha t of tritium ( ) is 3.016049 u , for a total o f
5.032151 u p er re action . So a mole o f reactants has a mas s of 5.03 g , and in 1.00 k g, there are
of reactants . The numb er o f reactions tha t tak e plac e is theref ore
.
The total energ y output is the numb er o f reactions times the energ y per re action:
b. Power is energ y per unit time . One y ear has so
We expect nucle ar pro cesses to yield larg e amounts o f energ y, and this is c ertainly the c ase here . The
energ y output o f from fusing 1.00 k g of deuterium and tritium is e quiv alent to 2.6 million
gallons o f gasoline and a bout eight times the energ y output o f the b omb tha t des troyed Hiroshima. Y et the
average backy ard s wimming p ool has a bout 6 k g of deuterium in it , so tha t fuel is plentiful if it c an b e
utiliz ed in a c ontrolle d manner .
67. : a. 0.01 Gy; b . 0.0025 Gy; c . 0.16 Gy
69.1.24 Me V
71.1.69 mm
73.For c ancer: The risk e ach y ear o f dying from induc ed cancer is 30 in a
million . For g enetic def ect: The chanc e each y ear o f an induc ed genetic
defect is 10 in a million .588
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

Additional P roblems
75.
77.a. ; b. This mas s is imp ossibly larg e; it is gre ater than the mas s of the entire Milky W ay
galaxy . c. is not pro duced through na tural pro cesses op erating o ver long times on Ear th, but through
artificial pro cesses in a nucle ar re actor .
79.If of rays are left a fter 2.00 cm , then only are left a fter 4.00 cm . This is much
smaller than y our la b partner ’s result ( ).
81.a. ; (b) F rom Appendix B , the energ y rele ased per dec ay is 4.27 Me V, so ; (c)
The monetar y value o f the energ y is
83.We kno w tha t and
Thus , the a ge of the tomb is
Challenge P roblems
85.a. ; b. 6.24 kW ; c. 5.67 kW
87.a. Due to the le ak, the pres sure in the turbine chamb er has dropp ed signific antly . The pres sure diff erenc e
between the turbine chamb er and s team c ondenser is no w very low. b. A larg e pres sure diff erenc e is
require d for steam to p ass through the turbine chamb er and turn the turbine .
89.The energies are
. Notice tha t mos t of the energ y goes to the ray.
Chap ter 11
Check Y our Under standing
11.1 1
11.2 0
11.3 0
11.4 0
11.5 1 eV
11.6 The radius o f the track is cut in half.
11.7 The c olliding p articles ha ve identic al mas s but opp osite v ector momenta.
11.8 blueshifte d
11.9 about the same
Concep tual Ques tions
1.Strong nucle ar force: interaction b etween quarks , me diated by gluons . Electroma gnetic f orce: interaction
between charg e particles , me diated photons . Weak nucle ar force: interactions b etween f ermions , me diated
by he avy bosons . Gra vitational f orce: interactions b etween ma terial (mas sive) particle , me diate by
hypothetic al gra vitons .
3.electron , muon , tau; electron neutrino , muon neutrino , tau neutrino; do wn quark , strang e quark , bottom
quark; up quark , charm quark , top quark
5.Conser vation energ y, momentum , and charg e (familiar to clas sical and rela tivis tic mechanics). A lso,
conser vation o f baryon numb er, lepton numb er, and s trang enes s—numb ers tha t do not chang e before and
after a c ollision or dec ay.
7.It me ans tha t the theor y tha t requires the c onser vation la w is not unders tood. The failure o f a long-
establishe d theor y often le ads to a deep er unders tanding o f na ture .
9.3 quarks , 2 quarks (a quark -antiquark p air)
11.Baryons with the same quark c omp osition diff er in res t energ y because this energ y dep ends on the
internal energ y of the quarks . So, a b aryon tha t contains a quark with a larg e angular589

momentum is e xpecte d to b e more mas sive than the same b aryon with les s angular momentum .
13.the “linac” to ac celera te the p articles in a s traight line , a s ynchrotron to ac celera te and s tore the mo ving
particles in a circular ring , and a detector to me asure the pro ducts o f the c ollisions
15.In a c olliding b eam e xperiment , the energ y of the c olliding p articles g oes into the res t mas s energ y of the
new p article . In a fix -targ et experiment , some o f this energ y is los t to the momentum o f the new p article
sinc e the c enter -of-mas s of colliding p articles is not fix ed.
17.The Standard Mo del is a mo del o f elementar y particle interactions . This mo del c ontains the electro weak
theor y and quantum chromo dynamics (Q CD). It describ es the interaction o f leptons and quarks though
the e xchang e of photons (electroma gnetism) and b osons ( weak theor y), and the interaction o f quark
through the e xchang e of gluons (Q CD). This mo del do es not describ e gra vitational interactions .
19.To explain p article interactions tha t involve the s trong nucle ar, electroma gnetic , and w eak nucle ar forces
in a unifie d way.
21.No, however it will e xplain wh y the W and Z b osons are mas sive (sinc e the Higgs “imp arts” mas s to these
particles), and theref ore wh y the w eak force is shor t rang ed.
23.Cosmologic al expansion is an e xpansion o f space. This e xpansion is diff erent than the e xplosion o f a
bomb where p articles p ass rapidly through space. A plot o f the rec essional sp eed of a g alaxy is
prop ortional to its dis tanc e. This sp eed is me asure d using the re d shift o f dis tant s tarlight .
25.With dis tanc e, the a bsolute brightnes s is the same , but the app arent brightnes s is in versely prop ortional
to the square o f its dis tanc e (or b y Hubble ’s law rec essional v elocity).
27.The obser ved expansion o f the univ erse and the c osmic b ackground radia tion sp ectr um.
29.If light slo w do wn, it tak es long to re ach Ear th than e xpecte d. We conclude tha t the object is much closer
than it re ally is . Thus , for ev ery rec essional v elocity ( based on the fre quency o f light , which w e as sume is
not dis turb ed by the slo wing ), the dis tanc e is smaller than the “ true” value , Hubble ’s constant is larg er
than the “ true” value , and the a ge of the univ erse is smaller than the “ true” value .
Problems
31.1.022 Me V
33.0.511 Me V, ,
35.a, b, and c
37.a. ; b. or ; c. or ; d. or ; e. or
39.A proton c onsis ts of two up quarks and one do wn quark . The total charg e of a proton is theref ore
41.The meson is c omp osed of an up quark and a s trang e antiquark ( ). Sinc e the chang es o f this quark
and antiquark are 2 e/3 and e/3, resp ectiv ely, the net charg e of the meson is e, in a greement with its
kno wn v alue . Tw o spin particles c an c ombine to pro duce a p article with spin o f either 0 or 1,
consis tent with the meson ’s spin o f 0. The net s trang enes s of the up quark and s trang e antiquark is
, in a greement with the me asure d strang enes s of the meson .
43.a. color; b . quark -antiquark
45.
47.965 Ge V
49.According to Example 11.7 ,
This is the mas s of the upsilon (1S ) meson firs t obser ved at Fermi la b in 1977. The upsilon meson c onsis ts
of a b ottom quark and its antip article .
51.0.135 fm; Sinc e this dis tanc e is to o shor t to mak e a track , the presenc e of the mus t be inf erre d from
its dec ay pro ducts .
53.3.33 MV
55.The gra viton is mas sles s, so lik e the photon is as sociated with a f orce of infinite rang e.
57.67.5 Me V590
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

59.a. 33.9 Me V; b. By conser vation o f momentum , . By conser vation o f energ y,
61.
63.
65.
67.a. ; b. Gre ater, sinc e if it w as mo ving slo wer in the p ast it w ould tak e les s
more to tra vel the dis tanc e.
69.
Additional P roblems
71.a.; b. ; c. ; d. ; e. f.
73.
75.
77.a. b.
Challenge P roblems
79.a. ; b. divide the numb er o f particles b y the are a the y hit:
81.a. 2.01; b . ; c. 6.50 m
83.
85.a. 938.27 Me V; b.
87.a. ; b. 0.3; Unific ation o f the three f orces bre aks do wn shor tly a fter the
separation o f gra vity from the unific ation f orce (ne ar the Planck time inter val). The unc ertainty in time
then b ecomes gre ater. Henc e the energ y available b ecomes les s than the nee ded unific ation energ y.591

Access f or free at opens tax.org.

INDEX
Symbols
αα-particles 262
αα-rays262
β-ray262
γ-rays262
A
aberra tion 63
absorb er240
absorption sp ectr um 260
acceptor impurity 418
accommo dation 81
activity 452
Albert Eins tein 179
ALICE detector 515
alpha (αα ) rays456
alpha dec ay457
amorphous solids 402
amplifier 425
angular ma gnific ation 89
angular momentum orbital
quantum numb er351
angular momentum projection
quantum numb er351
anti-s ymmetric function 305
antielectrons 456
antineutrino 459
antip article 497
aperture 158
app arent depth 65
atomic b omb 467
atomic mas s445
atomic mas s unit 445
atomic nucleus 442
atomic numb er442
atomic orbital 356
B
Balmer 261
Balmer f ormula 261
Balmer series 261
Bardeen 430
baryon numb er499
baryons 496
base current 424BCS theor y430
Becquerel 450
becquerels 453
beta (ββ ) rays456
beta dec ay458
Betelg euse 242
Bethe 471
Big Bang 522
binding energ y (BE) 447
binding energ y per nucleon
(BEN) 448
birefring ent 40
blackb ody 240
blackb ody radia tion 240
Blu-Ra y pla yer383
body-centere d cubic (BC C)404
Bohr 263 ,466
Bohr ma gneton 359
Bohr mo del 348
Bohr radius o f hydrog en 264
Bohr ’s mo del o f the h ydrog en
atom 263
bond length 395
Born interpreta tion 297
boson 495
Brack ett series 261
Bragg 165 ,272 ,272
Bragg planes 166
braking radia tion 375
breakdown v olta ge423
bree der re actor 469
Brew ster’s angle 35
Brew ster’s law35
C
Cameras 86
carbon-14 da ting 454
Cassegrain design 98
CD pla yer382
Chadwick 262
chain re action 466
charg e-couple d devic e (CCD) 86
char t of the nuclides 443
chemic al group 369
chroma tic a berra tions 71cladding 20
clas sical (G alile an) v elocity
addition 211
coherent w aves115
collector current 424
color 507
coma 64
comple x function 303
comp ound microsc ope92
Compton 256
Compton eff ect 256
Compton shift 256
Compton w avelength 258
concave68
concave mirror 54
conduction b and 415
constructiv e inter ferenc e116
converging lens 68
convex68
convex mirror 54
Cooper430
Cooper p air 430
Copenha gen interpreta tion 301
corne a80
Cornell Electron Stora ge
Ring 511
corner reflector 12
corresp ondenc e principle 307 ,
cosmic micro wave background
radia tion 527
cosmologic al principle 524
cosmolog y522
covalent b ond 371 ,394
critic al angle 17
critic al ma gnetic field 427
critic al mas s467
critic al temp erature 427
critic ality 467
curie (Ci) 453
curved mirror 54
cut-off fre quency 250
cut-off wavelength 252
cyclotron 510Index593

D
dark energ y532
dark ma tter 531
daughter nucleus 457
Davisson 271
Davisson– Germer
experiment 271
de Broglie 268
de Broglie w ave269
de Broglie ’s hypothesis o f ma tter
waves268
decay450
decay constant 451
decay series 460
density o f states 411
depletion la yer420
destructiv e inter ferenc e116
destructiv e inter ferenc e for a
single slit 144
deuterium 444
diamonds 21
diffraction 142
diffraction gra ting 154
diffraction limit 159
Diffuse d light 11
diopters 81
Dirac 278
direction o f polariza tion 31
dissociation energ y395 ,406
diverging lens 68
DNA164
donor impurity 418
doping 417
double -slit inter ferenc e
experiment 276
drift v elocity 419
E
Eins tein 251
electric dip ole transition 399
electron a ffinity 394
electron c onfigura tion 367
electron microsc opy279
electron numb er density 411
electro weak force495
emis sion sp ectr um 260
emit ter 240
endosc ope19
energ y band 414energ y gap 415
energ y lev els 316
energ y of a photon 251
energ y quantum numb er316
energ y sp ectr um o f
hydrog en 265
energ y-time unc ertainty
principle 310
equilibrium sep aration
distanc e395
even function 305
event 199
exchang e symmetr y397 ,495
excited energ y states o f a
hydrog en a tom 265
expecta tion v alue 304
eyepiec e92,96
F
face-centere d cubic (F CC)403
far p oint 81
Farsighte dnes s83
Fermi 464 ,468
Fermi energ y409
Fermi factor 411
Fermi temp erature 412
fermion 495
Feynman 517
Feynman dia gram 517
Fiber optics 18
field emis sion 334
fine s tructure 364
first focus 67
first postula te181
fission 464
Fizeau7
Fluoresc ence375
focal length 55
focal plane 72
focal point 55
forward bias c onfigura tion 422
Foucault 7
Fraunho fer260
Fraunho fer lines 260
free electron mo del 409
Fresnel 141
fring es118
fundamental f orce494G
Gabor168
Galile an rela tivity 180
Galile an trans forma tion 200
Galileo 95
gamma (γγ ) rays456
gamma dec ay460
Gamo w327
Gell-Mann 504
geometric optics 10
Germer 271
gluon 496
grand unifie d theor y495
ground s tate351
ground s tate energ y316
ground s tate energ y of the
hydrog en a tom 265
group v elocity 269
H
hadron 496
Hahn 464
half -life451
Heisenb erg 278
Heisenb erg unc ertainty
principle 278 ,458
Heisenb erg’s unc ertainty
principle 307
Hermite p olynomial 322
high b andwidth 20
high dose 480
hole 417
hologram 166
holograph y167
horiz ontally p olariz ed31
Hubble S pace Telesc ope160
Hubble telesc ope99
Hubble ’s constant 522
Hubble ’s law522
Humphre ys series 261
Hund 327
Huy gens 113
Huy gens’ s principle 26,143
hybridiza tion 398
Hydrog en-lik e ions 268
hyperfine s tructure 365
hyperopia 83594 Index
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

I
ima ge dis tanc e53
ima ge focus 67
ima ginar y numb er313
impurity a tom 417
impurity b and 418
incoherent 115
inde x of refraction 7
inelas tic sc attering 258
iner tial frame o f ref erenc e181
infinite square w ell 314
inter ferenc e fring es114
inter ferometer 127
ionic b ond 371 ,394
ioniza tion energ y265
ioniza tion limit o f the h ydrog en
atom 265
iridesc ence155
isotop es444
J
junction transis tor 424
K
Keck telesc ope99
L
Larg e Hadron C ollider
(LHC) 512
laser 381
lattice402
law of reflection 10
law of refraction 15
Length c ontraction 195
lens mak er’s equa tion 74
lepton 495
lepton numb er501
lifetime 452
light c one 205
line ar ac celera tor 509
line ar ma gnific ation 60
liquid cr ystal displa ys (LCDs) 38
liquid drop mo del 466
Lorentz factor 187
Lorentz trans forma tion 201
low dose 480
Lyman series 261M
Madelung c onstant 397
magnetic orbital quantum
numb er360
magnetogram 360
magnific ation 53
magnif ying glas s88
majority c arrier 419
Malus’ s law33
mas s def ect 447
mas s numb er442
Maxw ell's e qua tions 180
mesons 496
metallic b onding 409
metas table s tate381
Michelson 7,127
Michelson-Morle y
experiment 181
minority c arrier 419
mirror e qua tion 60
mis sing order 151
modera te dose 480
momentum op erator 304
mono chroma tic 115 ,381
Mosele y plot 378
Mosele y’s law378
muons 188
myopia 83
N
n-typ e semic onductor 418
nanotechnolog y336
near p oint 81
Nearsighte dnes s83
net ma gnific ation 93
neutrino 459
neutron numb er442
neutrons 442
Newton 98
Newton ’s rings 126
Newtonian design 98
Newtonian mechanics 180
nonreflectiv e coatings 124
normaliza tion 355
normaliza tion c ondition 298
nucle ar fusion 470
nucle ar fusion re actor 474
nucle ar mo del o f the a tom 262
nucle ar re actor 468nucleons 442
nucleos ynthesis 471 ,528
nuclide 442
O
object dis tanc e53
object f ocus 67
objectiv e92,95
odd function 305
optic al axis 54
optic al power81
Optic al stres s analy sis 39
optic ally activ e39
orbital ma gnetic dip ole
moment 358
order 117
P
p-n junction 420
p-typ e semic onductor 418
parent nucleus 457
particle ac celera tor 508
particle detector 513
Paschen series 261
Pauli’s exclusion principle 366 ,
Penzias 529
perio dic ta ble 369
Pfund series 261
phasor dia gram 146
photo current 249
photo electric eff ect 248
photo electro de 248
photo electrons 248
photon 251
Planck 245
Planck ’s constant 246
Planck ’s hypothesis o f energ y
quanta 246
plane mirror 52
Poisson’s sp ot141
polariz ed31
polyatomic molecule 398
popula tion in version 382
position op erator 304
positron 497
positron emis sion tomograph y
(PET )478
positrons 456Index595

postula tes o f Bohr ’s mo del 263
potential b arrier 326
power intensity 241
Pozzi 277
princip al maxima 121
princip al quantum
numb er316 ,350
princip al ra ys58
prob ability density 297
prop agation v ector 255
Proper length 195
prop er time 187
proton-proton chain 471
protons 442
Q
Q value 471
quantiz ed energies 245
quantum chromo dynamics
(QCD) 516
quantum dot 336
quantum electro dynamics
(QED) 516
quantum numb er246 ,265
quantum phenomenon 251
quantum s tate of a Planck
oscilla tor 246
quantum tunneling 326
quark 495
qubit 302
R
rad 479
radial prob ability density
function 355
radia tion dose unit 479
radio activ e da ting 454
radio activ e dec ay331
radio activ e dec ay law451
radio activ e tags476
radio activity 450
radiopharmac eutic al476
radius o f a nucleus 446
rainb ow22
ray9
ray mo del o f light 10
ray tracing 57,70
Rayleigh criterion 159
Rayleigh– Jeans la w245real ima ge53
redshift 523
reduced Planck ’s constant 255
refraction 14
rela tive biologic al
effectiv enes s479
Relativis tic kinetic energ y219
Relativis tic momentum 216
rela tivis tic v elocity addition 211
repulsion c onstant 405
resolution 159
resonant tunneling 336
resonant -tunneling dio de 336
Rest energ y223
rest frame 180
rest mas s217
retina 80
reverse bias c onfigura tion 422
Rigel242
Roemer 6
roentgen e quiv alent man
(rem) 480
rota tional energ y lev el399
Ruska 279
Ruther ford 262
Ruther ford g old f oil
experiment 262
Rydberg c onstant f or
hydrog en 261
Rydberg f ormula 261
S
scanning electron microsc ope
(SEM) 280
scanning tunneling microsc ope
(STM) 335
scattering angle 256
Schrieff er430
Schrö ding er278
Schrö ding er’s cat302
Schrö ding er’s equa tion 348
Schrӧding er’s time -dep endent
equa tion 312
Schrӧding er’s time -indep endent
equa tion 313
second f ocus 67
second p ostula te of special
rela tivity 182
secondar y maximum 121selection r ule 399
selection r ules 372
semic onductor 416
shell 367
siev ert (Sv )480
sign c onventions 75
simple cubic 404
simple ma gnifier 88
Simultaneity 184 ,208
single -photon-emis sion CT
(SPECT )477
single -slit diffraction
pattern 142
small-angle appro xima tion 57
Snell 15
Snell ’s law15
soap bubble 123
space-time 204
special theor y of rela tivity 180
spectrosc opic disp ersion 156
spectrosc opic nota tion 351
speed of light 181 ,220
spheric al aberra tion 64
spin projection quantum
numb er362
spin quantum numb er362
spin-flip transitions 365
spin-orbit c oupling 363
Standard Mo del 516
standing w ave state316
state re duction 301
stationar y state316
Stefan–Boltzmann c onstant 243
Stefan ’s law243
Stern-Gerlach e xperiment 364
stimula ted emis sion 382
stopping p otential 249
strang enes s503
Stras sman 464
strong nucle ar force445 ,494
subshell 367
synchrotron 510
synchrotron radia tion 511
T
theor y of everything 495
thin lenses 70
thin-film inter ferenc e122
thin-lens appro xima tion 74596 Index
Access f or free at opens tax.org.

thin-lens e qua tion 73
Thomson 262
thought e xperiment 184
Time dila tion 186
time -mo dula tion factor 313
Tonomura 277
Total energ y222
total internal reflection 17
transition metal 370
transmis sion electron
microsc ope (TEM) 279
transmis sion prob ability 328
transuranic element 461
tritium 444
tunnel dio de 336
tunneling prob ability 328
twin p arado x192 ,206
two-slit inter ferenc e296
type I sup erconductor 427
type II sup erconductor 427U
ultra violet c atastrophe 245
unp olariz ed32
V
valenc e band 415
valenc e electron 368
Van de Graa ff ac celera tor 508
van der W aals b ond 394
vertex54
vertically p olariz ed31
vibra tional energ y lev el400
virtual ima ge52
virtual p article 517
von La ue 165
W
W and Z b oson 496
wave function 296
wave function c ollapse 301
wave numb er255
wave optics 26,113wave packet278 ,308
wave quantum mechanics 268
wave-particle duality 276
weak nucle ar force494
Wheeler 466
width o f the c entral p eak 150
Wien’s displac ement la w242
Wilkinson Micro wave Anisotrop y
Probe (WMAP) 529
Wilson 529
work function 251
world line 204
X
X-ray diffraction 164
Y
Young 114
Z
Zeeman eff ect 360Index597